Learn Quantum Computing
with Python and IBM
Quantum
Second Edition
Write your own practical quantum
programs with Python
Robert Loredo

Learn Quantum Computing with Python
and IBM Quantum
Second Edition
Copyright © 2024 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt
Publishing or its dealers and distributors, will be held liable for any damages
caused or alleged to have been caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of
the companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of
capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this
information.
Senior Publishing Product Manager: Denim Pinto
Acquisition Editor – Peer Reviews: Saby Dsilva
Project Editor: Namrata Katare
Senior Development Editor: Elliot Dallow
Copy Editor: Safis Editing

Technical Editor: Simanta Rajbangshi
Proofreader: Safis Editing
Indexer: Pratik Shirodkar
Presentation Designer: Ajay Patule
Developer Relations Marketing Executive: Vidhi Vashisth
First published: September 2020
Second edition: January 2025
Production reference: 1280125
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Grosvenor House
11 St Paul’s Square
Birmingham
B3 1RB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-80324-480-8
www.packt.com

Contributors
About the author
Robert Loredo is the IBM Quantum Ambassador worldwide lead, a Qiskit
Advocate, and a Master Inventor with over 20 years of experience in the
technical industry. He is a prolific inventor holding over 250 patents in areas
such as: AI, life sciences, and quantum. He taught computer and software
engineering at Florida International University and holds both a Bachelors and
Masters degree in computer and electrical engineering from the University of
Miami. As a philanthropist, he donated the royalties from his previous book to
the charity Doctors without Borders.
I would like to thank the following people for their guidance, expertise,
and motivational support: Arvind Krishna, Dario Gil, Jay Gambetta,
Scott Crowder, Steffen Thoss, Katie Pizzolato, Blake Johnson, Tammy
Cornell, Birgit Schwarz, Bob Sutor, Denise Ruffner, Brian Ingmanson,
Charles Robinson, Chris Nay, Dan Maynard, Edward Van Halen, Enrique
Vargas, Gabe Chang, Hanhee Paik, James Weaver, Jerry Chow, John
Buselli, Julian Tan, Kenneth Wood, M. Lewis Temares, Mark Ritter,
Matthew Broomhall, Matthias Steffen, Michele Grossi, Mohammed AbdelMottaleb, Nick Bronn, Olivia Lanes, Paul Bastide, Pete Martinez, Petra
Florizoone, Voica Radescu, Vishal Bajpe, and Zaira Nazario for their
continued support.

About the reviewers
Hassi Norlén is a client engagement leader with IBM Innovation Studio. He is
also an IBM quantum technical ambassador and Qiskit advocate and has been at
IBM for 18 years. He holds an MSc. in physics from Uppsala University,
Sweden. He has worked as a science journalist, astronomy teacher, software
developer, content designer, and an engagement leader in various places around
the world. Since becoming an IBM quantum technical ambassador and Qiskit
advocate he has reconnected with his physics roots and has first-hand insights
into the rapidly evolving field of quantum computing, and specifically
Qiskit/IBM Quantum.
He is the author of Quantum Computing in Practice with IBM Quantum
Experience, and has also written about exploring quantum computing on nonstandard platforms in Qrasp - Quantum on a Raspberry Pi on Medium.
Michele Grossi is a senior fellow in quantum computing at CERN. He received
his industrial PhD in High Energy Physics from the University of Pavia while
working at IBM. Michele has worked as as a quantum technical ambassador at
IBM and a hybrid cloud solutions architect, and in his current role he cosupervises quantum machine learning projects within the CERN Quantum
Technology Initiative. His focus is the development of QML pipelines for highenergy physics problems with possible extensions to different fields. He is a coauthor of several scientific publications, a conference speaker, and a lecturer at
various universities. In 2019, Forbes selected Michele as one of the top 30 under
30 young Italian leaders in enterprise technology.
Sean Wagner is a research scientist, Quantum Technical Ambassador, and
Accelerated Discovery Ambassador at IBM Canada. As a member of the IBM
Canada National Innovation Team, Sean works with researchers at academic
institutions and industry partners in Canada, from start-ups to large companies.

The projects involve high-performance computing, computer architecture, data
science, and artificial intelligence applied to numerous scientific and business
domains. His most recent work focuses on hardware acceleration, particularly
for deep neural networks, and software tools for machine learning. As a member
of the IBM Quantum team, Sean is an advocate for and conducts workshops on
quantum computing. He earned a BASc. in Computer Engineering from the
University of Waterloo in 2003, and completed MASc. and PhD. degrees in
electrical and computer engineering at the University of Toronto in 2006 and
2011, respectively.
Voica Radescu holds a PhD in particle physics from the University of
Pittsburgh, PA USA. She currently works as the quantum alliances leader in
Europe for IBM, where she is committed to enabling quantum partners to
achieve success. Before joining IBM in 2017, Voica worked as a high energy
physics researcher at top institutions in Europe, such as DESY, CERN, and the
University of Oxford.
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

Contents
1. Contributors
1. Join us on Discord
2. Preface
1. Who this book is for
2. What this book covers
3. To get the most out of this book
4. Get in touch
5. Leave a Review!
3. Exploring the IBM Quantum Tools
1. Technical requirements
2. Getting started with the IBM Quantum Platform
1. Registering to the IBM Quantum Platform
2. Understanding the Manage account settings view
3. Getting familiar with the Compute resources view
4. Learning about pending and latest jobs
3. Using the Documentation to quickly start up
4. Understanding the IBM Quantum tools
5. Summary
6. Questions
7. Join us on Discord
4. Creating Quantum Circuits with IBM Quantum Composer
1. Technical requirements
2. Getting started with the IBM Quantum Composer
1. Launching the Composer
2. Familiarizing yourself with the Composer components
1. Understanding the Composer
2. Customizing your views
3. Creating a quantum circuit with the Quantum Composer
1. Building a quantum circuit with classical bit behaviors
2. Reviewing your results
4. Summary
5. Questions
6. Join us on Discord
5. Introducing and Installing Qiskit
1. Technical requirements

2. Understanding quantum and classical system interconnections
1. Reviewing the Qiskit library
2. Understanding how to organize and interact with Qiskit
3. Understanding Qiskit APIs
1. Aer
1. The Aer simulator
2. The Qasm simulator
3. Statevector simulator
4. The Unitary simulator
4. Installing and configuring Qiskit on your local machine
1. Preparing the installation
2. Installing Anaconda
3. Installing Qiskit
4. Configuring your local Qiskit environment
5. Getting support from the Qiskit community
1. Introducing the Qiskit community
2. Contributing to the Qiskit community
1. Specializing your skill set in the Qiskit community
6. Summary
7. Questions
8. Join us on Discord
6. Understanding Basic Quantum Computing Principles
1. Technical requirements
2. Introducing quantum computing
3. Understanding superposition
1. Learning about classical randomness
2. Preparing a qubit in a superposition state
3. Building a coin-flipping experiment
4. Understanding entanglement
1. Implementing the behavior of entangled qubits
2. Entangling two coins together
5. Understanding interference
6. Exploring the Bell states
1. Preparing the Bell states
2. Implementing the Bell states
7. Summary
8. Questions
9. Join us on Discord
7. Understanding the Qubit

1. Technical requirements
2. Comparing classical and quantum bits
1. Reviewing the classical bit
2. Understanding the qubit
3. Visualizing the state vector of a qubit
1. Visualizing the representation of a qubit
4. Visualizing the state vectors of multiple qubits
5. Implementing qubits on a superconducting system
6. Summary
7. Questions
8. Join us on Discord
8. Understanding Quantum Logic Gates
1. Technical requirements
2. Reviewing classical logic gates
3. Understanding quantum unitary operators
4. Understanding single-qubit gates
1. Hadamard (H) gate
2. Pauli gates
1. Identity (I) Pauli gate
2. NOT (X) Pauli gate
3. Y Pauli gate
4. Z gate
3. Phase gates
1. S gate
2. S† (dagger) gate
3. T gate
4. T† (dagger) gate
5. Rx gate
4. Universal U gate
5. Understanding multi-qubit gates
1. CNOT two-qubit gate
2. Toffoli multi-qubit gate
3. Swap gate
6. Understanding the measurement operator
7. Summary
8. Questions
9. Join us on Discord
9. Programming with Qiskit
1. Technical requirements

2. Customizing and optimizing quantum circuits
1. Components of a quantum circuit
2. Obtaining circuit properties and analysis
3. Customizing and parameterizing circuit libraries
3. Generating pulse schedules on hardware
1. Learning about instructions
2. Understanding pulses and Pulse libraries
3. Leveraging channels to transmit and receive instructions
4. Generating and executing schedules
4. Understanding the Job component
5. Summary
6. Questions
7. Join us on Discord
10. Optimizing and Visualizing Quantum Circuits
1. Technical requirements
2. Optimizing circuits using Preset Passmanager
1. Transpiling a quantum circuit
1. Generating preset passmanagers
2. Comparing circuit mappings on different backend devices
2. Understanding passes and pass managers
1. Learning about the Layout Selection type
2. Leveraging the pass manager
3. Visualizing and enhancing circuit graphs
1. Learning about customized visual circuits
2. Drawing the directed acyclic graph of a circuit
4. Summary
5. Questions
6. Join us on Discord
11. Simulating Quantum Systems and Noise Models
1. Technical requirements
2. Understanding the differences between simulators
1. Viewing all available backends
2. Running circuits on the Aer simulator
1. Adding parameters to the backend options
2. Initializing the qubits on a circuit
3. Running circuits on the statevector simulator
4. Running circuits on the unitary simulator
3. Accounting for noise in quantum circuits
1. Implementing an Aer noise model

2. Tracing the source of noise
1. Understanding decoherence
2. Understanding single-gate, multi-gate, and readout errors
3. Building your own noise model
4. Summary
5. Questions
6. Join us on Discord
12. Suppressing and Mitigating Quantum Noise
1. Technical requirements
2. Understanding the Qiskit Runtime service
1. Understanding Sessions
2. Understanding the Qiskit Runtime Options
3. Understanding Primitives
1. Understanding the Sampler primitive
3. Understanding the noise effects of decoherence
1. Understanding decoherence errors
2. Understanding dephasing errors
3. Differences between error suppression, mitigation, and correction
4. Summary
5. Questions
6. Further reading
7. Join us on Discord
13. Understanding Quantum Algorithms
1. Technical requirements
2. Understanding the meaning of outperforming classical systems
1. Learning about Deutsch’s algorithm
1. Understanding the problem
2. Defining the problem
3. Describing the problem as a quantum problem
4. Implementing Deutsch’s algorithm
2. Understanding the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm
1. Understanding the Deutsch-Jozsa problem
2. Generating a quantum solution using the Deutsch-Jozsa
algorithm
3. Implementing the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm
3. Learning about the foundational oracle-based quantum algorithm
1. Learning about the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm
1. Understanding the Bernstein-Vazirani problem
2. Generating a quantum solution using the Bernstein-Vazirani

algorithm
3. Implementing the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm
4. Summary
5. Questions
6. Join us on Discord
14. Applying Quantum Algorithms
1. Technical requirements
2. Understanding periodic quantum algorithms
1. Learning about the QFT algorithm
1. Understanding the QFT algorithm
2. Implementing the QFT algorithm
3. Learning about Grover’s search algorithm
1. Understanding the problem
2. Understanding Grover’s search algorithm
3. Implementing Grover’s search algorithm
4. Summary
5. Questions
6. Join us on Discord
15. Understanding Quantum Utility and Qiskit Patterns
1. Technical requirements
2. Understanding quantum utility
3. Understanding Qiskit Patterns
1. Step 1, Map
2. Step 2, Optimize your circuit
3. Step 3, Execute your circuit
4. Step 4, Post-process
5. Implementing the logical expression oracle
4. Summary
5. Questions
6. Join us on Discord
16. Appendix A: Resources
1. Join us on Discord
17. Appendix B: Assessments
1. Chapter 1 – Exploring the IBM Quantum Tools
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3

6. Answer
2. Chapter 2 – Creating Quantum Circuits with IBM Quantum Composer
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
7. Question 4
8. Answer
3. Chapter 3 – Introducing and Installing Qiskit
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
7. Question 4
8. Answer
4. Chapter 4 – Understanding Basic Quantum Computing Principles
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
7. Question 4
8. Answer
5. Chapter 5 – Understanding the Qubit
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
7. Question 4
8. Answer
6. Chapter 6 – Understanding Quantum Logic Gates
1. Question 1

2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
7. Question 4
8. Answer
9. Question 5
10. Answer
11. Question 6
12. Answer
7. Chapter 7 – Programming with Qiskit
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
7. Question 4
8. Answer
8. Chapter 8 – Optimizing and Visualizing Quantum Circuits
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
7. Question 4
8. Answer
9. Chapter 9 – Simulating Quantum Systems and Noise Models
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
7. Question 4
8. Answer
9. Question 5

10. Answer
11. Question 6
12. Answer
10. Chapter 10 – Suppressing and Mitigating Quantum Noise
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
7. Question 4
8. Answer
9. Question 5
10. Answer
11. Chapter 11 – Understanding Quantum Algorithms
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
12. Chapter 12 – Applying Quantum Algorithms
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer
7. Question 4
8. Answer
9. Question 5
10. Answer
13. Chapter 13 – Understanding Quantum Utility and Qiskit Patterns
1. Question 1
2. Answer
3. Question 2
4. Answer
5. Question 3
6. Answer

7. Question 4
8. Answer
14. Join us on Discord
18. Other Book You May Enjoy
1. Leave a Review!
19. Index

Preface
Ever since IBM released their first commercially available quantum system for
free on the cloud back in 2016, many researchers, developers, faculty, students,
and quantum enthusiasts have been running their experiments on real quantum
computers. Since then, many in both academia and industry have been investing
time and personnel to investigate the potential that quantum computing has in
store. The first step in this quantum journey is education, which I assume is why
you purchased this book. In this book, you will learn the basic principles of
quantum computing and how to leverage those principles to create quantum
algorithms and run them on IBM’s powerful quantum computers.
This book provides you with a step-by-step introduction to quantum computing
using the IBM Quantum platform. You will learn how to build quantum
programs on your own so you can discover early use cases in your industry or
domain and get equipped with quantum computing skills.
You will start working with simple programs that illustrate how these quantum
computing principles differ from classical computing and slowly work your way
up to more complex programs and algorithms that leverage advanced quantum
computing algorithms.
The quantum computing principles we will explore are superposition,
entanglement, and interference, then you’ll become familiar on how these are
used to create quantum circuits, which you can then run on IBM Quantum
systems.
Then, you’ll learn about the quantum gates and how they operate on qubits and
discover the Quantum Information Science Kit (QISKIT, depending on who

you ask, is pronounced KISS-kit) and its circuit libraries and advanced features
to help you build quantum algorithms.
You’ll then get to grips with quantum algorithms such as Deutsch-Jozsa, Simon,
Grover, and Shor’s algorithms, while visualizing how to create a quantum circuit
and run the algorithm on any of the quantum computers hosted on the IBM
Quantum platform.
Later, you’ll explore the basics on how your circuit is run on the quantum
hardware by learning about the Qiskit Runtime, which has many functionalities
to help optimize your quantum circuits.
By the end of this book, you’ll have learned how to build quantum programs on
your own and will have gained practical quantum computing skills that you can
apply to your industry or domain.

Who this book is for
This book is for Python developers who are interested in learning about quantum
computing and expanding their abilities to solve classically intractable problems
with the help of Qiskit. Some background in computer science and Python is
required. While a background in physics and linear algebra is suggested, it is not
entirely required.

What this book covers
Chapter 1, Exploring the IBM Quantum Tools, will introduce you to all the tools
available to you on the IBM Quantum platform. These tools will help you get up
and running quickly and easily without having to install or purchase anything.
Chapter 2, Creating Quantum Circuits with IBM Quantum Composer, discusses
this easy-to-use user interface, which is a great tool for visualizing how the
various quantum gates and operations affect each qubit and help build an
intuitive understanding of the differences between classical and quantum
computing.
Chapter 3, Introducing and Installing Qiskit, explores the Quantum
Information Science Kit (Qiskit) and its advanced features to develop and
implement various quantum algorithms, and noise models. Qiskit has various
features that help you build quantum circuits, algorithms, and applications easily
and allows you to run them on local simulators and real quantum systems.
Chapter 4, Understanding Basic Quantum Computing Principles, begins our
quantum journey by discussing the basic quantum computing principles of
superposition, entanglement, and interference, which are used by many quantum
algorithms. This will also help you understand what differentiates quantum
computing from classical computing.
Chapter 5, Understanding the Qubit, covers what the quantum bit, or qubit, is
and how you can manipulate it on a quantum system using the various gates and
operators, and how to visualize the results of those operations.
Chapter 6, Understanding Quantum Logic Gates, takes a deeper look at the
various quantum gates and operations used to change the state of the qubits and
your quantum circuit.
Chapter 7, Programming with Qiskit, is where we start digging into creating

quantum circuits using the quantum gates and operations we’ve learned about so
far. You will also learn how these gates and operations are converted into
microwave pulse schedules, which are what is used to manipulate the qubits on
the quantum system.
Chapter 8, Optimizing and Visualizing Quantum Circuits, discusses sending the
instructions from your quantum program to run on a quantum system, which has
some interesting work happening in the background. Which qubits are the best
for running your circuit? Which connections should we select between the qubits
that minimizes the number of gates? All these are taken care of by the preset
pass manager generator, which we will cover in this chapter.
Chapter 9, Simulating Quantum Systems and Noise Models, explains that all
quantum systems, no matter the technology used to create them, must deal with
the issue of noise. In this chapter, you will learn what these noises are and how
to create models that simulate them to better understand the effects they have on
your quantum circuit.
Chapter 10, Suppressing and Mitigating Quantum Noise, explains how to
mitigate the various effects noise has on a quantum system.
Chapter 11, Understanding Quantum Algorithms, takes a deep look at the basic
quantum algorithms to help understand how the quantum computing principles
of superposition, entanglement, and interference are used. We will also review
and code some fundamental concepts and algorithms which will help us
understand the more complex algorithms.
Chapter 12, Applying Quantum Algorithms, takes you through applying the
quantum computing principles and concepts that we’ve learned about to some
complex quantum algorithms.
Chapter 13, Understanding Quantum Utility and Qiskit Patterns, covers what
quantum utility is and why it is the key to getting us closer towards quantum
advantage. It will also provide an overview of the Qiskit patterns and how they

can simplify your development experience to build complex quantum circuits.
Appendix A: Resources, provides a list of further resources that you can use to
explore the topics covered in this book in more detail.
Appendix B, Assessments, provides the answers to the questions that you will
find at the end of each chapter.
To get the most out of this
book
You will need to have internet access to access the IBM Quantum systems
available to you. Since the platform is hosted on the cloud, you will not
need anything more than a browser and to register a free account.
You will also need an up-to-date browser (Firefox, Chrome, Safari)
OS requirements (only if installing the software locally): Windows, Mac,
and Linux.
Download the example code files
The code bundle for the book is hosted on GitHub at
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos
available at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/. Check them
out!
Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams
used in this book. You can download it here:

https://packt.link/gbp/9781803244808.
Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
CodeInText: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder
names, filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and
Twitter handles. For example; “Simply run pip install qiskit-aer
from your command line, or Python environment, and that should be all you
need.”
A block of code is set as follows:
from qiskit_ibm_runtime import QiskitRuntimeServi
ce
# Save your IBM Quantum account to allow you to u
se systems:
QiskitRuntimeService.save_account(channel="ibm_qu
antum", token='PASTE-API-TOKEN-HERE', set_as_defa
ult=True)
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the
relevant lines or items are set in bold:
import numpy as np
#Bind the parameters with a value, in this case 2π
qc = qc.assign_parameters(parameters={param_theta
: 2*np.pi})
#Draw the circuit with the set parameter values
qc.draw(output='mpl')

Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
pip install qiskit
Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see on the
screen, for example, in menus or dialog boxes, also appear in the text like this.
For example: “One of the more popular experiments that have come out of
quantum mechanics is the double-slit experiment.”
Warnings or important notes appear like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
General feedback: Email feedback@packtpub.com, and mention the
book’s title in the subject of your message. If you have questions about any
aspect of this book, please email us at questions@packtpub.com.
Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our
content, mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book we would
be grateful if you would report this to us. Please visit,
http://www.packtpub.com/submit-errata, selecting your book,
clicking on the Errata Submission Form link, and entering the details.
Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the
Internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location address

or website name. Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a
link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have
expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book,
please visit http://authors.packtpub.com.
Leave a Review!
Thank you for purchasing this book from Packt Publishing—we hope you enjoy
it! Your feedback is invaluable and helps us improve and grow. Once you’ve
completed reading it, please take a moment to leave an Amazon review; it will
only take a minute, but it makes a big difference for readers like you.
Scan the QR code below to receive a free ebook of your choice.
https://packt.link/NzOWQ

Download a free PDF copy of
this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books
everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of
that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from
your favorite technical books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts,
newsletters, and great free content in your inbox daily.
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1. Scan the QR code or visit the link below:

https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781803244808
2. Submit your proof of purchase.
3. That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email
directly.

1
Exploring the IBM Quantum
Tools
Quantum computing has been growing in popularity over the past few years,
most recently since IBM released the first commercially available quantum
computer on the cloud back in May 2016, back then referred to as the IBM
Quantum Experience, now rebranded as the IBM Quantum Platform (IQP).
This release was the first of its kind, hosted on the cloud and providing the world
with the opportunity to experiment with quantum devices for free. The platform
includes a user interface (UI) that allows anyone to run experiments on a real
quantum computer. And just recently added was direct access to all
documentation and learning resources, such as tutorials and courses, right from
the platform, making it easier to run circuits as you learn.
The goal of this chapter is to first introduce you to the IBM Quantum Platform,
which contains everything you need to learn how to create and run quantum
circuits on real quantum systems. It also provides you with courses and tutorials
to experiment with existing quantum algorithms and applications. The IBM
Quantum Platform is comprised of the following three applications, which you
can see listed in the Application Switcher located at the top-right corner of the
platform (see Figure 1.1):
Platform: Lists all the jobs and systems (dashboard, systems, and jobs) you
have access to on the platform.
Documentation: Provides a list of resources to help you get started.

Resources include how to set up your development environment and
build/test/execute quantum circuits on quantum systems. It also provides
API documentation of the latest version of the Quantum Information
Science Kit (Qiskit) open-source code.
Learning: Provides quantum courses and tutorials for users of all different
levels. These cover topics such as the basics of quantum computing,
variational algorithm design, and a new addition: quantum-safe
cryptography!
You can select and switch between each of these applications using the top-left
applications icon next to your avatar, the switcher is shown in the following
figure:
Figure 1.1: Application selection

This chapter will help you understand what actions and information are available
in each application, each of which we will also cover in more detail in later
chapters, to give you an overview of where everything is. This includes creating
circuits, running the circuits on both simulators and real quantum devices,
viewing information about your profile and available backend systems, and
visualizing the results of your experiments. So, let’s get started!
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Getting started with the IBM Quantum Platform
Using the documentation to quickly start up
Understanding IBM quantum tools
Technical requirements
Throughout this book, it is expected that you will have some experience in
developing with Python and, although it isn’t necessary, some basic knowledge
of classical and quantum mechanics would help. Most of the information will be
provided with each chapter, so if you do not have knowledge of classical or
quantum mechanics, we will cover what you need to know here. For those of
you who have existing knowledge in this area, the information here will serve as
a useful refresher.
The Python editor used throughout this book is Jupyter Notebook. You can, of
course, use any Python editor of your choice. This may include Watson Studio,
PyCharm, Spyder, Visual Studio Code, and so on.
Here is the source code used throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition

Getting started with the IBM
Quantum Platform
As mentioned earlier, the IBM Quantum Platform application is your high-level
view of what you will normally see once you log in. It’s good to mention here
that there may be updates to the tools as the platform evolves with the
technology after the time of writing, so some visualizations and results may vary.
The platform aggregates multiple views that you can see, and this helps you to
get an idea as to what machines you have access to and what jobs you have
pending, running, or completed.
In this section, we will go through the steps to get registered. Let’s get started.
Registering to the IBM Quantum
Platform
In this section, we will get registered and explain what happens in the
background once you sign up to the IBM Quantum Platform for the first time.
This will help you understand what features and configurations are prepared and
available to you upon registration.
To register, follow these steps:
1. The first step is to head over to the IBM Quantum Platform site at the
following link: https://quantum.ibm.com/
2. You should see the login screen, as shown in Figure 1.2. Your individual
situation will determine how to proceed from there:
If you already have an account or are already signed in, you can
sign in and skip this section.
If you have not registered, then you can select the login method
of your choice from the sign-in screen. As you can see, you can

register using various methods, such as with your IBMid,
Google, GitHub, Twitter, LinkedIn, or by email.
If you do not have any of the account types listed, then you can
simply register for an IBMid account and use that to sign in:
Figure 1.2: The IBM Quantum Platform sign-in page
3. Once you select the login method of your choice, you will see the login
screen for that method. Simply fill out the information, if it’s not already
there, and select login.

4. Once signed in, you will land on the IBM Quantum Platform home page.
This is the first page you will see each time you log in:
Figure 1.3: The IBM Quantum home page
Now that you have registered with IBM Quantum Platform, let’s take a quick
tour and delve into some features that make up the home page.
Note first that across the top of the Platform application page you have three
tabs: Dashboard, Systems, and Jobs. Each of these provides various
information for you, which we will cover in detail in the following sections. But
before we get started, let’s look at the Manage account settings view.
Understanding the Manage
account settings view
Let’s start by reviewing the home page, specifically the Manage account
settings view. You can access your user account and settings view via your
avatar, located at the top right of the page (as visible in Figure 1.3).

This view provides profile settings of the logged-in user, as illustrated in Figure
1.4:
Figure 1.4: The Manage account settings view
This view also provides actions regarding your profile such as setting your
password, email, API token, and in-app notification settings.
The API token is used by the provider to determine which
systems you have provisioned for your account. This is
autogenerated when you use the platform; however, should you
ever decide to run a notebook off the platform, then you will
need to save your API token locally. We describe how to save
and load your account details locally in Chapter 7, Programming
with Qiskit and the Qiskit Runtime Service.
Below the Manage account settings is the Instances list, which allows you to
see which instances you are a member of. Instances are used to determine which
IBM Quantum systems you have access to based on which hub, project, or group
you belong to, as illustrated in Figure 1.4. Also, below the list of instances is the
option Delete Account, which will also remove all your account data.

Figure 1.5: Instances and Delete Account views
Finally, at the bottom of the Profile settings you will see your Notification
settings, which you can enable based on your preferences.
Getting familiar with the Compute
resources view
The Compute resources view provides you with a list of all the various
quantum services available to you, which include the quantum systems. You can
see all the available services by selecting the grid icon, located at the top left of
the IBM Quantum Platform view, and selecting the Platform tab.
Once the Compute resources page is open you will see a grouping of systems
via a pull-down selector highlighted by a box in the following figure. The
groupings are of systems that you have access to and a list of all systems
including those systems reserved for premium users, as illustrated in Figure 1.6:

Figure 1.6: The Compute resources view
The view contains all the systems available to you.
Each card (or row if viewing in table mode) represents a different quantum
system available to you and details that describe each system. In the previous
figure you can see it lists out detailed specifications. Systems with a lock icon
next to them are those reserved for premium users such as those who are active
members of the IBM Quantum Network.
The details you can see for each system are:
Qubits, which is the number of qubits available
Error Per Layered Gate (EPLG), which is the latest metric used to
measure the quality and performance of a quantum system
Circuit layer operations per second (CLOPS)
Status, which is the availability of the system (Online, Maintenance, etc.)
Total pending jobs, which is the number of jobs waiting to run on the
system (queue)

Processor type, which is the type and version of the processor of the
system
This information allows you to visualize all the systems and their metrics so you
can select an ideal system to run your quantum circuits.
The second selector is to view All Instances; this lists all the quantum systems
that are available to you, including the open systems as well as premium
quantum systems, if you are a quantum network member. To view the list as a
table, rather than cards, you can select table view (located just above the system
selector) as illustrated in Figure 1.7:
Figure 1.7: A table view of all available systems – shows all available quantum systems, including premium
systems
In this view, same as the Your resources view, each row represents details about
each quantum system’s properties such as the status, processor type, number of
qubits, quantum volume, and CLOPS.
CLOPS is one of the measurements that is used to determine the

performance of a quantum computer. It measures the speed at
which a quantum processor can execute layers of a circuit,
similar to the parameterized model circuits used to measure the
quantum volume of a quantum computer.
The names of the systems do not represent the location of the device; the city
names originated from where IBM Research has a lab and have since expanded
to include cities where IBM has offices around the world. At the time of writing,
the IBM Quantum systems reside in many locations around the world. The
largest groups are located at the IBM Research Lab in Yorktown Heights and in
Poughkeepsie, NY. There are now many on-prem systems in many locations,
such as IBM Ehningen, Germany (via a partnership with FraunhoferGesellschaft), and University of Tokyo. The first on-prem system that is not on
an IBM site was recently installed in Cleveland Clinic, with many more
scheduled to be installed in other countries such as Spain and South Korea.
Above the rows you have a few features; one is a search window to help you
find a specific system and next to that is a filter option, which allows you to
narrow down the visible list of systems based on provider, status, or processor
types. You can also see them as cards if you select the card selection on the top
right of the table.
To view further details of each quantum system, let’s select one of the systems;
in this case I will select ibm-brisbane, as seen in Figure 1.8. Keep in mind that
systems will continue to evolve and may be replaced after the time of writing
this, so if a system is mentioned in this book that you do not see, don’t worry;
just select any that you like as the details you see will vary per device.

Figure 1.8: The device details view (truncated view of all 127 qubits)
In this view you can examine each system in more detail. Each quantum system
has a set of properties that you have access to view. This helps greatly if there
are some constraints or requirements to the type of system you wish to run your
quantum programs on—for example, the connectivity between qubits, the error
rate of each qubit and its physical connection, the basis gates, and other details
that we will cover in detail in various chapters throughout this book.
This view also allows you to download a CSV file that contains all these
properties so you can analyze them using any analysis tools you wish. To
download the properties, simply click on the download icon located below the
Last calibrated time in the Calibration data section.

You’ll also notice that there are two pull-down options available just above the
qubit map of the system, where one has a set of options for Qubit and another
for the Connection between the qubits. The options provide you with the ability
to see what properties you wish to have rendered for each qubit and connection,
respectively. In the qubit options you can select to see the details of each qubit,
such as its frequency, T1/T2 times, anharmonicity, and readout assignment error.
The connection options allow you to view the CNOT error and gate time (in
nanoseconds) between each physically connected qubit.
There are of course other ways to obtain these properties
programmatically using Qiskit code, but we will get to that later
in this book. For now, this is just for awareness, so in later
chapters when you learn more about them, you’ll know where
the information is located.
We are now familiar with the systems, and their details, on which we will run
our quantum circuits; let’s see how we can view the results after the quantum
systems have completed their job.
Learning about pending and latest
jobs
When you send a circuit to run on a simulator or a quantum system you will
want to know the status of the circuit. This is where the Jobs view comes in
handy. To get to the Jobs view, go back to the grid icon located at the top left of
the dashboard and select Jobs from the list of views. Once the view is open you
will see a table, as shown in Figure 1.9, that contains a complete list of jobs that
are pending completion on either the simulators or backend devices. You can use
this view to see the status of your circuit or program, the job ID, which provider

and service were used, and other details for each job you submitted:
Figure 1.9: The Jobs view list
The job ID is listed so that you can call back the details of that job later. Each
job is initially sorted by creation date but can also be filtered by Status
(completed, pending, or returned), Session Id (the unique ID for the session the
job was run in), Compute resource (which simulator or quantum system was
used), or Usage (time indicating how long the job took to run).
Details regarding job objects will be covered in Chapter 7,
Programming with Qiskit.
In this section, you have learned where to find information about your
experiments, and hardware details about the quantum devices from the various
views available on the IBM Quantum Platform. There are views that also
provide you with the tools you need to start programming and running circuits
on a quantum computer, in an easy-to-use format that does not include any

installation of software.
In the next section we will review what the Documentation application provides
you to help get started using the systems we just learned in this section.
Using the Documentation to
quickly start up
Earlier in this chapter we covered what systems you have access to and details
about each system. In this section we will review the Documentation application,
which will provide you with information and guidance on how to get yourself up
and running and executing quantum circuits on a quantum computer.
First, from the application selector, select the Documentation application. This
will open the Documentation page as illustrated in Figure 1.10:
Figure 1.10: Documentation application view
Let’s look across the top of the page where you will see seven shortcuts each to

help you get started. They are described as follows:
Overview: The view that you see when you first get to the documentation
page that has all the options
Start: Directions on how to get your local system set up and install Qiskit
Build: Instructions on how to design and develop your first quantum
circuits
Transpile: How to optimize the mapping of your circuit onto the selected
device to ensure the highest quality and performance
Verify: As the title indicates, how to test, verify, and evaluate your quantum
circuits
Run: Executing your tested quantum circuits on the quantum systems
API reference: Quick links to key documentation on common objects and
functions
Below the Get started with Qiskit and API Reference section of the page, you
will also see the various tutorials available for those of you who already have
your system set up and want to dive right into running quantum algorithms on a
quantum computer. Each tile represents a different tutorial and they are
independent of each other so you can pick whichever you’d like to get started on
without worrying about any dependency on another tutorial.
Now that you know where to find the documentation needed to help you get up
and running quickly, let’s continue and explore the tools you can use to generate
quantum circuits using the IBM Quantum Composer.
Understanding the IBM
Quantum tools
Understanding the systems and knowing the status of our circuit jobs is great,
but knowing how to create these circuits and run them is clearly an important

step. In this section we will review both tools that are available to you. Using the
application switcher, select the last application listed, Learning.
The following figure, Figure 1.11 is the IBM Quantum Learning application
view. This view provides you with a one-stop shop of resources. At first you will
see that at the top, it highlights the latest course that was released. At the time of
writing this, it was the Fundamentals of quantum algorithms. Below that is
the catalog of courses available to you on the platform with topics ranging from
the basics of quantum information science to quantum-safe cryptography.
Figure 1.11: IBM Quantum Learning application view
Below the courses you will see three other sections. The first is the list of
tutorials. This is the same list you saw in the previous section. It is duplicated in
this section for completeness as it is of course the learning application. And at
the bottom is the Resources section, which lists other helpful learning resources,
as illustrated in the following figure:

Figure 1.12: Courses, Tutorials, Tools, and Resources sections.
We have two ways to launch each tool. First, as illustrated in Figure 1.12, you
can launch each tool by clicking on it within the Tools section. The second way
is by selecting it from the top of the page as illustrated in Figure 1.11.
The Composer is a graphical UI where you can create your quantum circuits by
dragging and dropping quantum gates onto a quantum circuit. The Composer
also provides various visual representations of the results such as the state of the
circuit and the expected probability measurements. This makes the Composer a

fantastic tool to help you get a visual, and perhaps intuitive, understanding of
how the various quantum gates and properties affect the results of both the qubit
itself and the overall quantum state. This is a tool I highly recommend you start
with as it contains some very nice introductory tutorials that you can follow to
create your first quantum circuit and run it on an actual quantum computer. We
will create a simple circuit and run it on a quantum computer in Chapter 2,
Creating Quantum Circuits with IBM Quantum Composer.
Now that we are done with our tour of the IBM Quantum tools, we’re ready to
get to work. In the following chapters, we will delve further into the Composer
and progress to writing quantum programs.
Summary
In this chapter, we reviewed the IBM Quantum Platform, which provides plenty
of information to help you get a good lay of the land. You now know where to
find information regarding your profile, details for each of the devices you have
available, the status of each device, as well as the status and results of your
experiments. Some views might look a little different based on the level of
provider you have. I have chosen to use the free open provider throughout this
book so all users can see the general views. If you are a premium or partner user,
then your views may have more information or options that are specific to your
provider. Details about those differences are outside the scope of this book;
however, you can check with your IBM Quantum representative for details about
the additional views and roles.
Knowing where to find this information will help you monitor your experiments
and enable you to understand the state of your experiments by reviewing your
backend services, monitoring queue times, and viewing your results queues.
In the next chapter, we will learn about the Composer in detail and run our very
first quantum circuit.

Questions
1. Which Application contains your API token?
2. Which device in your resources list has the fewest qubits?
3. Which Application would provide you a qubit map of a quantum system?
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

2
Creating Quantum Circuits
with IBM Quantum
Composer
In this chapter, you will learn how to use the IBM Quantum Composer and
what each of its component functions are with respect to creating and running
experiments. The Composer will help you to visually create a quantum circuit
via its built-in UI, which in turn will help you to visually conceptualize some of
the basic principles of quantum mechanics used to optimize your experiments.
You will also learn how to preview the results of each experiment and create
your first quantum circuit.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Getting started with the Quantum Composer
Creating a quantum circuit with the Quantum Composer
By the end of this chapter, you will know how to create a quantum circuit using
the Composer, and create experiments that simulate classic gates and quantum
gates. You will also have learned where to examine the various results of your
experiments, such as state vectors and their probabilities. This will help you
understand how some quantum gate operations affect each qubit.
Technical requirements

In this chapter, some basic knowledge of computing is assumed, such as
understanding the basic gates of a classic computing system.
Here is the full source code used throughout the book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition
Getting started with the IBM
Quantum Composer
In this section, we will review the IBM Quantum Composer (hereafter referred
to as simply the Composer) layout so that you can understand its functionality
and behavior when creating or editing quantum circuits. Here, you will also
create a few circuits, leveraging the visualization features from the Composer to
make it easy for you to understand how quantum circuits are created. So, let’s
start at the beginning: by launching the Composer.
Launching the Composer
To create a quantum circuit, let’s first start by opening the Composer. To open
the Composer view, click on the Composer button located at the top of the IBM
Quantum Learning (https://learning.quantum.ibm.com) application
as shown in the following screenshot:
Figure 2.1: Launch the Composer
Now that you have the Composer open, let’s take a tour of what each component
of the Composer editor provides you with.

Familiarizing yourself with the
Composer components
In this section, we will get familiar with each of the components that make up
the Composer. These allow you to do things such as visually inspect the results
of your experiments in a variety of ways. Visualizing the construction of the
quantum circuit will help you conceptualize how each quantum gate affects a
qubit.
Understanding the Composer
In this section, we will review the various functionalities available to ensure you
have a good understanding of all the different features available to you.
In Figure 2.2, you can see the landing page of the Composer view:
Figure 2.2: The IBM Quantum Composer view
From the preceding screenshot, you can see the Composer view, containing

three qubits (q[0], q[1], and q[2]). This might not look the same when you
launch the Composer for the first time. If you would like to add or remove
qubits, you can simply select a qubit, for example q[1], by clicking on it, and
selecting the plus icon or the trash icon, which will appear over the specific
qubit.
If any of the views are not visible, this just means they have not
been enabled. You can enable them by selecting the View pulldown menu located across the top of the Composer, hovering
over Panels, and selecting the views that are not visible: for
example, the Statevector view.
To reproduce the views used throughout this chapter, simply add or remove the
qubits until you only have three qubits left. You can add/remove by clicking on
the qubit label. The default is three.
Now that you have your views set up, let’s continue to the Composer view itself.
In the following screenshot, you can see a series of gates and operations:

Figure 2.3: Gates and operations
Each of the components shown has a specific function or operation that acts
upon the qubit(s), which we will cover in detail in Chapter 6, Understanding
Quantum Logic Gates.
As we can see in the following screenshot, we also have the circuit editor itself,
which is the part of the Composer where we will create our quantum circuit by
placing various gates and operations:

Figure 2.4: Circuit editor
As you can see from the preceding screenshot, the default circuit includes three
qubits (though this might change over time) each of which is labeled with a q,
and the index appended in order from left to right (in this case, q[2], q[1], and
q[0]). This will be significant when we want to map the results from our
quantum circuit. Each qubit is initialized to an initial state of 0 before running
the experiment.
The last line is the classical bits, which are what we will map each qubit to so
that when we complete running our quantum circuit, the results are then passed
to the classical bits according to the mapping. By default, the mapping from
qubit to bit is done based on the index of the qubit. For example, q0
measurement results will be mapped to c0 via the measurement operator, which
we will see when we run our quantum circuit. You can add or remove classical
bits in the same manner as qubits.
Next to the qubit you will see a line, which looks like a wire running out from
each qubit, in the circuit editor:

Figure 2.5: Qubits and circuit wires
These lines are where you will be creating a circuit by placing various gates,
operations, and barriers on them. This circuit has three wires, each of which
pertains to one of the three qubits on the quantum computer. The reason it is
called a Composer is primarily that these lines look very similar to a music staff
used by musicians to compose their music. In our case, the notes on the music
staff are represented by the gates and operations used to ultimately create a
quantum algorithm.
In the next section, we will review the various options you have available to
customize the views of the Composer. This will allow you to ensure that you can
only see what you want to see while creating your quantum circuit.
Customizing your views
Continuing with our Composer tour, at the top of the Composer view are the
circuit menu options that allow you to save your circuit, clear the circuit, or
share your quantum circuit:

Figure 2.6: The Composer menu options
First, we will cover how to save your circuit. To do this, simply click on the
default text at the top left of the Composer where it currently reads Untitled
circuit, and type in any title you wish. Ideally, select a name that is associated
with the experiment. In this case, let’s call it MyFirstCircuit and save it by
either hitting the Enter key or clicking the checkmark icon to the right of the
title, as shown below:
Figure 2.7: Renaming the circuit
Across the top of the Composer, you will see a list of drop-down menu options.
The menu items in the preceding screenshot have the following options:
File provides options to create and open circuits, as well as copy, export,
share, or delete the current circuit.
Edit allows you to manage your circuit and clear gates and operators.
View enables the various view options, which we look at in the following
sections.
Let’s now look at each of the various views in the following sections.
The Graphical Editor view
The Graphical Editor view contains a few components used to create quantum
circuits:

Figure 2.8: The Graphical Editor view options
The components include the following:
Circuit Composer: UI components used to create quantum circuits.
Operations: A list of available drag-and-drop gates and operators to
generate a quantum circuit.
Options: The ability to set up the alignment and turn on the Inspect
feature, which allows you to step through each gate and operation as you
would to debug your code on an IDE or browser.
Disk: A disk that is located at the end of the circuit to serve as a visual
representation of each qubit as you add gates and operations.
Now that we know where we can create a quantum circuit, let’s move on to
displays, which provide various ways to visualize the results of our quantum
circuit.
The Statevector view
The Statevector view allows you to preview the state vector results, which is to
say the quantum state result of your quantum circuit. The state vector view
presents the computational basis states of the quantum circuit in a few different
ways. To simplify the view, I have removed all but one qubit so it is easier to

read the values.
You can do the same if you wish, otherwise your x axis may have more than just
the two states of 0 and 1, as shown in the following figures:
Figure 2.9: The Statevector view
First, we see the Amplitude bar graph, which represents the amplitude of the
computational basis states. In this case, as mentioned earlier, for simplicity we
have reduced the number of qubits to just one qubit, for which there are two

computational basis states, 0 and 1. These are represented along the x axis. The
value of the amplitude of each basis state is represented along the y axis. In this
case, since we do not have any gates or operators on our circuit, the state vector
representation is that of the initial (ground) state. The initial state indicates that
all qubits are set to the 0 (zero) state, indicated by an amplitude value of 1.
At the bottom of the Statevector view we see the Output state representing the
complex value of each computational basis state. In this case since we are in the
initial state, we see the 0 state at 1 + 0j and the 1 state at 0 + 0j.
To the bottom left is the phase wheel. The phase wheel is a color visual
representation of the phase for each basis state, which has a range between 0 and
2π. Since we have not applied any phase gates, we see the default phase of 0
represented by the color blue. As you apply phase shifts to each qubit, the color
of the bar will update according to the color representation of the phase.
We will cover what phases are in more detail in later chapters,
but for now just know where they are and how they are
indicated, both by value in the state vector results and in the
phase wheel by color.
The state vector information is just one of the visual representations of your
quantum circuit. There are a couple of others we want to visit before moving on.
The Probabilities view
The next view is the Probabilities view. This view presents the expected
probability result of the quantum circuit (with the addition of a single
measurement operator to the qubit). As mentioned in the previous description,
and illustrated in the following screenshot, since we do not have any operators
on the circuit, the results shown are all in the initial state of 0:

Figure 2.10: The Probabilities view
The probability view is a general representation of the results based on expected
values, not the actual results you will get from a quantum system. This view
currently represents what the Composer is calculating classically as we have not
yet run this circuit on an actual quantum computer. The results you will see as
we create this circuit are computed by the classical system and not by a quantum
system. The results from a quantum system are received after we send the
completed circuit to run.
The Q-sphere view
Finally, the last of the state visualizations we must review is the Q-sphere view.

The Q-sphere looks similar to a Bloch sphere, which is used to represent the
statevector of the current state of a qubit. However, the Bloch sphere does have
some limitations, particularly that it can only represent the state of a single qubit.
On the other hand, the Q-sphere can be used to visually represent the state
information of a single qubit or multiple qubits at once in one sphere, including
the phase information. The following screenshot shows a representation of a
circuit with three qubits, all of which are in the initial state:
Figure 2.11: The Q-sphere view
The Q-sphere view has two components; the first is the Q-sphere itself, which
represents the state vector of the multi-qubit state, represented by a vector that
originates at the center of the sphere. At the end of the vector is a smaller sphere,
which represents the probability of the state by the radius of the top that lies on

the surface of the Q-sphere. The states represented by these small spheres are
visible when hovered over. The previous screenshot illustrates the three qubits in
an initial state of , with a probability of 1, and a phase angle of 0.
Those fancy symbols around the numbers are referred to as Kets;
we will learn about them later in this book. For now, just think of
them as labels to differentiate between the number 0 and the
quantum state |0 , for example.
The second component is located at the bottom left, which is the legend that
describes the phase of the states. Since the small sphere represents the phase
angle of 0, the color of the sphere is blue, which is the same as what the legend
indicates for the phase of 0. If the state had a phase value of π, then the color of
the sphere would be red.
There are various options here; on the top right you can see an ellipsis that you
can select, providing various options to download visualizations in different
image formats, and to move the view to the left or right. At the bottom right you
can select whether to enable the state or phase angle information of the Qsphere.
OK, we went through all of the various views and components that make up the
Composer view, so now let’s go to the fun part and start creating our first
quantum circuit!
Creating a quantum circuit
with the Quantum Composer
Now that we know where everything is in the Composer, we will create our first
quantum circuit. This will help you to get a better understanding of how all these

components work together, and it will show you how these components provide
insights such as the current state and its probabilistic estimation as you build
your first quantum experiment.
Building a quantum circuit with
classical bit behaviors
We are all familiar with some of the basic classic bit gates such as NOT, AND,
OR, and XOR. The behavior that these classic gates perform on a bit can be
reproduced on a quantum circuit using quantum gates. Our first experiment will
cover these basic building blocks, which will help you to understand the
correlation between quantum and classical algorithms.
Our first experiment will be to simulate a classical gate, specifically a NOT gate.
The NOT gate is used to change the value of the qubit, in this case from the |0
state to the |1 state, and vice versa. We will cover details on how this gate
operates on qubits in Chapter 6, Understanding Quantum Logic Gates.
To simulate a NOT gate on a quantum circuit, follow these steps:
1. From the open Composer editor that you previously created and titled
MyFirstCircuit, reduce the number of qubits and classical bits down
to just one of each if you have not already. This will simplify the
visualization of the results for us. You may have to reopen the other views
such as qsphere. to get the updated changes.
2. Next, click and drag the NOT gate, which is visually represented by the
symbol, from the list of gates down onto the first qubit, as shown in the
following screenshot:

Figure 2.12: Add an X (NOT) gate to the first qubit
3. Next, click and drag the measurement operation onto the first qubit, q0, just
after the NOT gate:
Figure 2.13: Add a measurement operator to the first qubit
4. By taking a measurement of the qubit and having its value sent out to the
pertaining classic bit, we are essentially reading the state of the qubit. You
can see this by the connecting arrow between the measurement operator and
the classical bit. It also includes the index of the classical bit, the result of
which the measurement operator will write out, which in this case is the bit

in position 0.
Note that the result bits, similar to the qubits, will be
ordered from left to right: c2c1c0, for example.
A measurement occurs when you want to observe the state of the qubit.
What this means is that we will collapse the state of the qubit to either a 0
or a 1. In this example, it is straightforward that when we measure the
qubit after the NOT gate, the reading will be 1. This is because since the
initial state is set to 0, applying a NOT gate will flip it from 0 to 1.
Before we run this experiment, let’s note a few things. First, note that the classic
bits are all on one line. This is mostly to save space. Next is to note that all the
views are updated as we add gates and operators. As mentioned earlier, this is the
system computing these classically to provide us with an ideal result. We have
not yet specified which quantum computer to run this circuit on, hence the
results you are seeing are what the classical system is computing and not realtime results from a quantum computer.
1. Select the Setup and run button located at the top right of the Composer
view. This will display the run settings, illustrated as follows:

Figure 2.14: The run settings view
2. The run dialog prompts you to take two steps:
First, select which quantum system you would like to run the
experiment on. Select any of the options you wish to run. In this
example, we’ll select ibm_brisbane.
The second step first allows you to select the Provider. There
are different providers—ibm-q/open/main is for open free
quantum devices, and if you are a member of the IBM Quantum
Network then you’ll have a provider that assigns you to the
available premium quantum devices.

For now, leave it at the default setting. This step also prompts you to select
a number of Shots of the quantum circuit you wish to run. What this means
is how many times you wish the quantum circuit to run during your
experiment to obtain a reliable overall result. For now, let’s set it to 8000.
3. Now that you have selected your run options, let’s run the circuit. Click
Run on ibm_brisbane. If you selected a different device, it will indicate it
accordingly.
Once your experiment begins, you should see an entry of this experiment in the
Composer jobs view in the left panel on the Composer view, indicating that
your experiment is Pending. While the job is Pending, it will display the status
of the job, accordingly.
Note that depending on how busy the selected device is, you may
have to wait for some time for your job to complete.
Once completed, you will see the status for the specified job as Completed,
illustrated as follows:
Figure 2.15: The Composer jobs view displaying the job status for the selected circuit

1. Upon completion, open your experiment from the list by clicking on the
job. This opens the Jobs results view:
Figure 2.16: The Jobs results view
2. Once you have the job opened, you can see some basic information about
the job, such as the job ID across the top, followed by the date and time the
job was completed, the backend it was run on, and three views that contain
details about the job itself, such as the status, details, and results. You will
also see a button at the top right that will provide the same information in
the views, only in a separate window. Let’s review the views next.
First, we have the Status timeline view, as illustrated in Figure 2.17:

Figure 2.17: The jobs status timeline view
Here you can see the timeline that represents the time it took to complete your
circuit. Each step represents the different processes that your circuit completes as
it is executed on the quantum system:
Creatinged: The date and time the job instance was added to the queue to run on
a specific quantum system.
In queue: The length of time your job was in the queue prior to running on the
quantum system.
Running: The time it takes from moving out of the queue and running on a
quantum system before returning the results back. Time in system is the actual
time that the circuit is running on a quantum system, separate from the time it is
on the classical components. For example, transforming the circuit from digital
to analog and analog to digital is not included in the time in system value.
Completed: The date and time the job had completed running on the quantum
system.
Next is the Details view, as seen in the following figure, which provides you
with the details of the job; in this case it was sent from MyFirstCircuit. It
also provides information such as the program, the number of shots, the number

of circuits, and the instance. The instance is the provision of the quantum
system; since we are using open free devices, this is categorized as an open
system.
If you are a premium user, you will likely run in a mode specific to your
provider, details of which you can obtain from your administrative provider.
Figure 2.18: The Details view
Finally, the Result – histogram view, illustrated in Figure 2.19, shows you the
results of your experiment as rendered on a histogram.

Figure 2.19: Job results – histogram view
In this view, the x axis represents the frequency of each state that resulted after
each shot of your circuit. The y axis represents each state that had a result.
All these views can be seen on a separate page altogether by clicking the See
more details button, located at the top right of the report. This will provide the
same details regarding your experiment, plus it will include the transpiled circuit
diagram. The transpiled diagram will show you the same circuit, only it will use
the basis gates of the specified quantum system. We will cover what basis gates
are and how they are transpiled into the circuit in a later chapter. For now, think
of it as a circuit using gates that are specific to the quantum system, as illustrated
in the following screenshot:

Figure 2.20: The Details view with the original circuit (left) and the transpiled circuit (right)
The diagram of the circuits is just one of the three representations of the circuit.
The other two tabs will display the Qasm and Qiskit representations. Keep in
mind that depending on the size of the device that you ran this on, you may see
all qubits listed (which could range over 100 qubits). In this case I truncated the
view so you only see a few qubits to save space.
Now that we have the results from running our first quantum circuit, let’s take a
closer look at our results and see what we got back.

Reviewing your results
The histogram result in Figure 2.19 provides information about the outcome of
our experiment. Some parts might seem straightforward, but let’s review the
details. It may seem trivial now, but later when we work on more elaborate
quantum algorithms, understanding the results will prove invaluable.
There are two axes to the results. Along the y axis, we have all the possible states
(or measurement outcomes) of our circuit. This is what the measurement
operation observed when measuring the qubit. Recall that we measured the first
qubit, so from the least significant bit (on the far right), q0 is in the right-most
position within each possible state result. Therefore, as we add more qubits, they
are appended to the left of the previous qubit. For example, a three-qubit system
would be set in the following order, q2, q1S, q0. We know that our likely result of
is correct due to the fact that we placed a NOT gate on the first qubit, which
changes its state from 0 to 1. If we were to add two more qubits, then the second
and third qubit would simply take a measurement that equates to measuring the
initial state, which we know to be 0, creating a likely result of .
The x axis provides the results for each of the possible states. Since we ran the
experiment 8000 times, the results show that we a have very high chance of the
first qubit resulting in the state of 1. The reason why the result is not 100% is
due to noise from the quantum device. We will cover the topic of noise in later
chapters, but for now we can be confident of a high probability, based on our
results, that the NOT gate worked.
In this section, we simulated a simple NOT gate operation on a qubit and ran the
circuit on a quantum device.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the IBM Quantum Composer and its many

components. You created an experiment that simulated a classic NOT gate. You
then viewed the results on a histogram, and read the probabilities based on the
results.
This has provided you with the skills to experiment with other gates to see what
effect each operation has on each qubit and what information might be
determined or used based on the results of the operation. This will be helpful
when we look at some of the quantum algorithms and how these operations are
leveraged to solve certain problems.
In the next set of chapters, we will move away from the click-and-drag work of
the UI and instead create experiments using Jupyter Notebook, as well as
beginning to program quantum circuits using Python.
Questions
1. From the Composer, where would you find the time it took to run your
circuit on a quantum computer?
2. How would you remove or add a qubit to your circuit on the Composer?
3. On which view would you specify which quantum system to run your
circuit?
4. Which sphere would be ideal to view the quantum state of three qubits in a
single sphere?
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

3
Introducing and Installing
Qiskit
In this chapter, you will learn about the Quantum Information Science Kit
(Qiskit) and its advanced features to develop and implement various quantum
algorithms, quantum application modules, and noise models. Qiskit (pronounced
kiss-kit) is comprised of various features that help you build quantum circuits,
algorithms, and applications easily, and it allows you to run them on both
classical simulators and real quantum systems and visualize the results. In this
chapter, you’ll also see instructions on how to install Qiskit on your local
machine to create quantum circuits and run them on a quantum computer.
This chapter will also discuss how to contribute to the open-source community
and the development of future quantum applications, as well as how to connect
to other like-minded developers and enthusiasts via the Qiskit community.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Understanding quantum and classical system interconnections
Understanding Qiskit APIs
Installing and configuring Qiskit on your local machine
Getting support from the Qiskit community
Technical requirements

Knowledge of GitHub is recommended as we will review how to contribute to
the Qiskit open-source project, which is hosted on GitHub. Having Agile and
open-source development practices is also recommended, but not required.
Here is the source code used throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
Understanding quantum and
classical system
interconnections
In this section, we’ll review how quantum computational systems are integrated
with classical systems. As quantum computers do not have ways to store the
state of a qubit, there is a dependency on classical systems to provide persistent
storage for information that is sent to or received from a quantum computer.
Since most data originates from classical sources, whether they are from data
repositories or remote sensors, there is a need to prepare the data to be used in a
quantum system. Likewise, the results from the quantum systems need to be
returned not in a quantum state but in binary form so that they can be read back
to a classical system for any post-processing that’s required.
This hybrid or interconnectivity between classical systems and quantum systems
is what we will be reviewing in this section so that you understand how both
systems work together to provide you with the most optimal results. Qiskit
Runtime, which is a new feature that was introduced in early 2022, has some
good examples you can try. There are lots of papers that describe other forms of
integrating classical and quantum resources, such as this paper, A Serverless
Cloud Integration For Quantum Computing:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.02007.

Reviewing the Qiskit library
If you worked on some of the previous chapters, then you would have noticed
that we used Qiskit to create sample circuits, which we used to describe some
quantum concepts. As Python developers, you would have also noticed that
Qiskit is functionally no different from using any other Python libraries, such as
NumPy, scikit-learn, and so on. How we use it within our Python notebooks is
also the same as we would use any other package, where we can import the
complete package or just a subset of classes and functions. By having the Qiskit
modules available through Python, this allows us to integrate our classical
algorithms and applications into a quantum system. Leveraging the libraries
available in Qiskit to create quantum circuits that execute on quantum devices
from a classical development environment such as Python makes integration
with your existing classical applications very seamless and straightforward.
Qiskit, much like most other open-source projects, is easy to set up, both as a
package with Python or as a branch or a fork if you’re just acting as a
contributor. It’s very compact and does not require much with respect to
resources to run on local machines.
Another advantage of creating it as a package for an existing platform such as
Python is that there is no need to install a separate integrated development
environment or set up complex build systems with confusing dependencies. For
those of you who already have Python installed with the currently supported
version, you can install Qiskit with a simple pip command:
pip install qiskit
But let’s not get too ahead of ourselves. Now that we understand the purpose of
Qiskit and its general functionality, we will work our way to installing Qiskit
locally by first understanding how it is organized. Then, we’ll cover how it

interacts with your classic systems such as your laptop, server, or cloud
application.
Understanding how to organize
and interact with Qiskit
If you use Python for most of your development, which I assume you do, based
on the title of this book, then you will understand that most packages are created
in some form of hierarchy. At the top level, there are the application modules,
while the lower levels refer to the components within each module.
Qiskit has components such as classes or objects, and under each of those
components, you have functions and members. Qiskit is no different regarding
how everything is organized from most other packages, which makes it very
easy to find certain features.
At the base level you have hardware connectors; these are what connects Qiskit
to the various quantum providers. In addition to hardware connectors are the
classical simulators; in this book, we will be using the Qiskit Runtime service to
run our circuits, which includes some locally installed Qiskit simulators. Of
course, as these simulators run on classical systems, they are limited to the
number of resources to simulate quantum circuits. As the quantum circuits
become more complex, the cost in resources grows rather fast. This has been
highlighted in various publications where certain complex quantum circuits can
be simulated on classical systems; however, there are discrepancies in the
accuracy across the various classical results. This is why having the hardware
connectors available to run complex circuits is important, as it allows you to
offload complex circuits from classical simulators to real quantum systems that
run at utility scale. You might be asking yourself, what makes a circuit complex?
Well, I can say that it does not have to do with relationship status. It’s more
about the width of the circuit, which correlates to the number of qubits, and the

depth of the circuit, which correlates to the number of operations deep,
particularly the number of multi-qubit gates that entangle two or more qubits
together. We’ll cover details about each of these in more detail as you progress
through the book.
Above the connectors and simulators is the fundamental building block for
researchers and developers, the Qiskit Runtime. We will go deeper into what the
Qiskit Runtime is in later chapters, but for now just think of it as a runtime that
provides you with a lot of features to create, run, and optimize your quantum
circuits.
In the previous versions of Qiskit, the modules were set up such that the domain
of each algorithm was spread out: by that, I mean the modules covered error
correction, simulators, gate and circuit components, and applications. In this
case, an algorithm developer would have to learn how to incorporate multiple
modules together, therefore causing the developer to have to understand the
various components and modules at the base level to incorporate them into their
application. This has since changed after the introduction of the latest code
changes to Qiskit.
First, we need to introduce the three development layers or segments, which
allow developers to provide modules to each other to help create quantum
applications. Having these three layers, which are not that much different from
classical application development, allows classical developers to solely focus on
their own layer, which eliminates the need to fully understand what is occurring
at another layer. Let’s take a quick look at the three development layers.
A kernel developer is one who develops code at the lowest level of the
three layers. They work mostly on creating quantum circuits, the
composition of gates, hardware pulse level controls, and other features that
are close to the hardware. Qiskit Terra is the module that the kernel
developer would work with, which includes the circuit library that allows

them to create new or use existing circuits.
An algorithm developer is one who leverages the circuits created by the
kernel developer to create quantum algorithms. These algorithms can
provide ways to encode classical data into a quantum state. For example,
the information of a pixel can be represented as a quantum state where the
qubits would represent the location and color value of each pixel of an
image. They can also create a quantum algorithm that would not need to
encode any classical data at all. The algorithm developer could also include
some of the latest Qiskit features that provide infrastructure optimizations,
such as the Qiskit Runtime, so that the integration of classical and quantum
systems is robust.
A model developer is one who applies algorithms to create applications that
solve real-world problems. These model developers can be domain or
industry experts that understand the problems that may be intractable for
classical systems and determine how to apply quantum algorithms to these
problems. By creating models for certain problems, the model developer
could provide a quantum application that could, for example, integrate as
part of a large workflow or as a service provider, which classical
applications could call upon as needed.
These three layers working together allow the developer to focus solely within
their layer to develop components that could provide the others with the tools
they need to enhance their applications. This also facilitates collaboration
between each of the developers, as they can provide feedback to each other to
further optimize their components.
The following diagram illustrates the layers and what Qiskit libraries or
components would generally apply to each developer type.

Figure 3.1: Kernel, Algorithm, and Model developer layers
Of course, the preceding information is based on the current version of Qiskit. In
the future, like many projects, this may change. I highly recommend keeping up
to date with the current Application Programming Interface (API)
documentation to ensure that you are using the proper calls when writing your
code. The API for this can be found on the Qiskit documentation page at
https://www.qiskit.org/documentation/.
The documentation page provides the latest information on the four available
modules, often referred to as elements due to their names, as explained at the
beginning of this chapter.
So far, we have defined the three different development layers that help simplify
developers jumping into programming quantum applications without too much
of a learning curve. For example, a model developer might only need to
understand how the quantum algorithms work to create a model for a classical

application rather than having to also learn which gates the circuits used to
create the algorithm.
The following section will describe the API references so that you understand
how to leverage them in your code. The development specifics will be covered
in future chapters, where we will talk about the functionality and operations that
each can provide.
Understanding Qiskit APIs
Qiskit was built for anyone who wants to work with quantum computers at every
level and domain. By this, we mean that if a quantum researcher wanted to work
on how the pulses are scheduled on a quantum device, they could do so very
easily. The same can be said about users who simply want to extend their
applications to leverage a quantum computer to compute information.
In this section, we will learn about the various APIs that are available in Qiskit
today. As mentioned earlier, Qiskit has various layers that can be leveraged by
any domain expert to start using quantum computing in their applications.
Let’s take, for example, chemistry researchers who wish to compute the energy
state of two molecules but don’t want to go through the hassle of learning about
quantum gates and pulses. They just want to load their dataset, classically, to a
quantum algorithm and obtain the results transparently. Qiskit was built as a full
stack open-source software package to facilitate those and many more user-type
scenarios using the application modules.
Quantum physicists can experiment at the hardware level by researching ways to
schedule pulses to single and multi-qubits. Quantum researchers can work on
developing quantum circuits that could minimize noise, which would optimize
the results of your quantum circuits.
Algorithm researchers and developers usually work on creating quantum

algorithms that can be used by various domains and industries either to solve
problems faster or provide more accurate results.
Finally, domain researchers such as chemists, data scientists, economists, and
many others can integrate their classic applications into a quantum system to
compute complex problems more optimally or accurately using various features
such as the Qiskit Runtime.
Qiskit, at the time of writing, has released its latest version, Qiskit 1.0. This new
version provides you with a lot of great features that will take your development
skills to the next level. Most particularly to the new era of quantum utility!
Let’s start off by learning about the built-in simulators that are available in
Qiskit. The simulators are great for getting started, but as your development
skills and understanding of quantum increase, so to will your need to run more
complex circuits where classical simulators, such as those described herein,
could have some limitations.
Aer
Before getting into what Aer is, let’s first make sure we install it, as Aer has
moved to its own separate component and as it makes sense to run some
simulations when starting, do install it onto your system as it is now a
requirement if you plan to run local simulations on your classical system. Simply
run pip install qiskit-aer from your command line, or Python
environment, and that should be all you need. Aer provides a framework that can
be used to develop debugging tools and create noise models. These tools help
replicate a lot of the characteristics of a quantum system by simulating the noise
that affects not just the qubit but also the environment and computations. There
are generally five highly efficient compiled simulator categories available in
Aer; they are:

AerProvider, the main class that contains all the simulators
QasmSimulator, a quantum simulator that allows for simulation methods
and options
StatevectorSimulator, an ideal quantum state vector simulator used to
produce non-noisy results from your circuit
UnitarySimulator, an ideal quantum unitary simulator
Pulse, a simulator used to generate and schedule pulse operations
Note, there is discussion over whether Pulse will be removed in
the near future. It’s included here for the sake of completeness,
but it may not always be available. For that reason, we will not
explore Pulse further in this chapter.
We will look at the differences between each simulator category in the upcoming
sections and in Chapter 9, Simulating Quantum Systems and Noise Models, you
will learn more about the specific simulators within each category, including
those within Aer itself.
The Aer simulator
Aer itself is also a category that contains a list of its own types of simulators that
are specific to obtaining specific information about the quantum circuit, such as
the density matrix, matrix product state, and multiple stabilizer simulators. This
simulator is the main simulator to reproduce how an actual backend system can
behave and includes an options object, which can be used to provide
parameters such as density matrices to reproduce noise typically found in a
quantum system.
The Qasm simulator

The Qasm simulator allows us to run our circuits in both clean and noisy
simulated environments. The difference between the two is the amount of noise
that you wish to apply to the simulator. On the one hand, it could run as an errorfree ideal system that you can use to confirm the computational results of your
circuit. On the other hand, you could run your circuit through a simulator that
includes noise models so that you can replicate the noise and understand how it
affects your computations. We will learn more about noise and noise models in
Chapter 10, Understanding and Mitigating Quantum Noise.
The Qasm simulator also has multi-functional capabilities and methods to
simulate circuits, such as statevector, density_matrix,
stabilizer, matrix_product_state, and many more. By allowing
you the flexibility to configure the Qasm simulator using any of these methods,
you can expect an ideal outcome from the measured circuits, along with any
models that you wish to incorporate.
The Qasm simulator also provides a list of backend options you can use to
execute your quantum circuit. These options include setting threshold values to
truncate results or setting floating-point precision values and maximum value
constraints for executing circuits. These features make Aer the ideal component
for those who wish to develop an ideal or replicated noisy system. Typically, Aer
is used by researchers who wish to develop noise mitigation or error correction
techniques.
Statevector simulator
The Statevector simulator is, as its name suggests, a state vector simulator that
provides the final state vector of the circuit without the measurement operation
at the end.
Results from the Statevector simulator can be visualized by leveraging the
various visualization tools of quantum states, such as histograms and cityscape.

The cityscape option provides a nice 3D view of both the real and imaginary
components of the density matrix ( ). Other visualization plots include Hinton
diagrams, Pauli vector plots, and Bloch spheres, to name a few. Some of these,
such as the Bloch sphere and the qsphere and other visualization tools will be
covered in future chapters, as they will help you visualize some of the effects
that gates have on qubits.
The Unitary simulator
The Unitary simulator is quite simply just that — it provides the unitary matrix
result of your circuit by computing the overall matrix of the circuit. The idea is
that a circuit with only unitary operators/gates each operating on a subset of the
qubits can be expressed as a single unitary operator. This can be accomplished
by multiplying all the operator matrices in the circuit to arrive at a single overall
matrix/operator.
This is very helpful if you want to confirm that the operations you applied to the
qubits match your expected calculations.
You can imagine how helpful this will be when you start to work on multiple
qubits with many operators. The Unitary simulator helps provide state
information so that you can ensure that the results are what you expected.
Installing and configuring
Qiskit on your local machine
In this section, we will walk you through the installation process of Qiskit. It is
important to note that to complete the examples in this book, you will need to
install Qiskit on your machine locally, as the IBM Quantum Platform no longer
has a lab, nor does it have any simulators to run circuits on the cloud, only the
actual quantum systems, which you will have limited access. The installation

will include installing Anaconda, which is the tool used by many Qiskit
developers to install Python, Jupyter Notebooks, Qiskit, and many other data
science packages. It also serves as a simple way to manage packages and how
they are installed on your local machine. In our case, it will help by installing the
prepackaged dependencies we will need, such as Python, Jupyter Notebooks,
pip, and many others.
Once installed, you can create an environment specific to quantum development
with all the dependencies and features already installed. By having a local
installation, you can run your circuits from the local system onto simulators on
your local device.
Preparing the installation
Qiskit is an open-source project that is available for free to everyone. It is
licensed under the Apache 2.0 license
(https://apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0). A copy has also
been included in each Qiskit module (for example,
https://www.github.com/Qiskit/qiskit/blob/master/LICEN
SE.txt). This allows you to use the source code, along with all its rights and
privileges, as defined in the license.
The installation of Qiskit is quite simple, particularly if you are already familiar
with the package management application known as pip. To review the Qiskit
metadata package information, such as its current stable version, build status,
and other details, go to https://pypi.org/project/qiskit.
We have highlighted that you should install the full version as there have been
issues with the mini version. You can, of course, try either, but if you get issues
with the mini version, it is recommended that you install the full version.

Installing Anaconda
Anaconda (https://www.anaconda.com/distribution) is an opensource cross-platform distribution of Python. It allows the user to create separate
environments so that they can install multiple versions of Python. This is very
useful, particularly for those of you who are Python developers and already have
a version of Python installed on your machine.
By creating a separate environment using Anaconda, you can eliminate issues
that may come up due to installing a different version of Python that may affect
your existing Python projects or applications. Having separate environments also
provides you with the ability to have multiple versions of Qiskit. You need to
have a working version of Qiskit up and running while you install an update on a
separate environment so that you can test if your quantum applications currently
support the latest releases without worrying about dependency issues.
It is recommended to follow the installation instructions on the Anaconda site.
The installation steps of Anaconda also include versions of Jupyter Notebook,
which comes in handy, as the Qiskit notebooks will not be available locally.
However, since the Qiskit notebooks are built on Jupyter Notebooks, you
shouldn’t expect to see much of a difference between the two.
After installing Anaconda with the supported version of Python – at the time of
this writing, the currently supported version is 3.9 – be sure to create an
environment in your installation and switch to that environment before
proceeding and installing Qiskit. Otherwise, it will install on your base
environment. After successfully completing the installation and creating your
Anaconda environment, you are now ready to install Qiskit!
Installing Qiskit
Before installing Qiskit, be sure to check the installation page

(https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/start/install) for any updates
on either the installation or configuration steps, as things might change. The
following steps will lead you through the installation process:
1. We’ll begin by ensuring that you are in the environment you created. The
best way to determine this is to launch your command line and enter the
following:
conda info --envs
The preceding code will list all the environments on your system. You will
see one titled base and another with the name of the environment that
you created. The current environment is identified by an asterisk, as
illustrated in the following screenshot:
Figure 3.2: Output of the current environment command
As shown in the preceding screenshot, another way to identify the
environment is to look at the far left of the command line before the
machine name. There, in parentheses, is the current environment. In the
preceding screenshot, I created an environment called QiskitEnv. Now,
let’s activate the environment by running the following in the command
line so we can enable it and start the installation process:
conda activate QiskitEnv
This will now activate the environment on your machine.
For details, I recommend reviewing the documentation on getting started

with conda here:
https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/use
r-guide/getting-started.html.
2. Once you are in the Qiskit environment after activating it in the previous
step, you can now run the pip command to install Qiskit:
>pip install qiskit
Based on your machine and network speed, this may take a few moments.
3. Once completed, you can verify the installation by entering the following
on the command line:
>pip list | grep qiskit
This will list the installed Qiskit packages and their respective versions,
which you should see includes all the various Qiskit libraries. To see the
most current list of optional packages, just visit the Qiskit metadata
package information page at
https://pypi.org/project/qiskit.
With that, you have installed and verified that Qiskit is installed on your local
device. Now, you can launch a Jupyter Notebook and start using Qiskit!
Wait! Not so fast. There are just a couple of steps we should cover before we
start coding and running circuits. We want to make sure your local machine is
configured. The first thing you need to ensure is that you have your token ID
saved on your local device. This way, when you are ready to run an experiment
on a real device or on the simulator on the cloud, you can do so very easily.

Configuring your local Qiskit
environment
Next, we’ll need to install some new features to leverage the latest building
blocks and visualization packages. The IBM Runtime package and optional
visualization package will allow you to run circuits efficiently on a quantum
system and visualize the results from your circuit, respectively. Subsequent steps
include saving your account information onto your local machine, which will be
used to connect and use the IBM Quantum systems.
The steps needed to get yourselves up and running are as follows. Note for Mac
users that the strings in the brackets, in this case, visualization, need to be
wrapped with single quotes (i.e., 'visualization') – otherwise, you will
get an error:
1. Open your terminal and run each of the following:
pip install qiskit-ibm-runtime
pip install qiskit[visualization]
Once the installations have been completed, you can move on to the next
step, which is to set up your account information on your local machine by
copying your account API token.
2. There are two places where you can obtain your API token; the first is from
your dashboard on the IBM Quantum Platform page
(https://quantum.ibm.com), as illustrated in the following figure:

Figure 3.3: API token on the dashboard
3. The second way to obtain your API token is via the Manage account page.
To get to your account page, just click on your avatar at the top right of the
page and select Manage account from the drop-down list, as illustrated in
the following screenshot:
Figure 3.4: API token on the Manage account page

4. After the account page opens, click the Copy token icon located to the right
of the API token field, as highlighted in the following screenshot:
Figure 3.5: Copy your account API token
Now that you have copied your API token, let’s save it on your local
machine.
5. Launch Jupyter Notebook by entering the following on the command line:
jupyter notebook
6. As we are launching this locally, we do not have the launcher here to create
a new notebook, so we will have to create one ourselves. Let’s do that now
by clicking New | Python 3 at the top right of Jupyter Notebook, as
illustrated in the following figure:

Figure 3.6: Creating a new Python 3 notebook
This will create a new Python 3 notebook. Note this created a blank
notebook, so we also do not have the nice boilerplate cell that imported a
lot of the commonly used classes and functions. We will have to either
import them, as we need them, or you can just copy/paste in the
boilerplate code from a previously created notebook that contains the
boilerplate cell. In the following, we will just add the classes and functions
as needed.
7. Once it has launched, enter the following into the first cell. You will also
want to do this on the “setup_save_account.ipynb" file that is
included in the code samples you have access to. This file will be imported
and used in the early chapters for convenience, so please be sure you update
the API token information there as well; otherwise, you will see errors
when running the sample code:
from qiskit_ibm_runtime import QiskitRunti
meService
# Save your IBM Quantum account to allow y

ou to use systems:
QiskitRuntimeService.save_account(channel=
"ibm_quantum", token='PASTE-API-TOKEN-HERE'
, set_as_default=True)
Be sure to include the single quotes (' ') around
your API token in the argument; otherwise, you may
get an error.
Now that we have saved our API token locally, we won’t have to save it to
our local system again unless we delete or change the API token value.
Remember to copy your token, as indicated in the preceding command.
Important note
Note that you only run this command once. If by chance, you
forget and rerun the above function again, you may get a
warning. You can find other account setting commands here in
the Qiskit API documentation: https://docs.quantumcomputing.ibm.com/start/setupchannel#select-and-set-up-an-ibm-quantumchannel.
Congratulations! You have successfully configured your local version of Qiskit!
You are now ready to run circuits locally on your system. Creating and executing
circuits can now be done locally on a simulator for those times when you are
unable to obtain network access. Of course, once you are back online, you can
use your local version to execute circuits on real devices. This also allows you
the freedom to integrate with your own applications or systems with ease. By

having the ability to run your code locally, you can integrate new code into your
own local applications easily.
In this section, you learned how to install Anaconda, which includes a lot of the
dependencies necessary to install Qiskit; how to create a quantum circuit; how to
execute the circuit on a simulator; and how to execute the circuit on a quantum
computer. Now, we’ll learn how to contribute, collaborate, and get support from
the Qiskit global community.
Getting support from the
Qiskit community
The Qiskit community is a global group of developers, researchers, and pretty
much anyone who is curious about quantum computing that comes together,
collaborates, and supports each other to help build knowledge across all
community members. It is also used to keep everyone up to speed on the latest in
quantum research, education, events, and updates:
https://www.ibm.com/quantum/events. A recent add-on is the ability
to get certified as a Qiskit developer via the Qiskit Developer Certification
exam. There is currently an updated course based on the Qiskit 1.x version
coming out in late 2024.
In this section, you will learn about the community, its many programs, and how
you can contribute and become a Qiskit advocate
(https://www.ibm.com/quantum/community#advocates). Qiskit
advocates are members of the Qiskit community who have passed a rigorous
exam, have made many contributions to the Qiskit community, and have helped
many others along the way. Let’s start by introducing you to the community
itself.

Introducing the Qiskit community
Ever since Qiskit was first deployed as an open-source project, the open-source
community has contributed so many features and enhancements that it has only
improved over time. The development ecosystem itself has flourished so much
that it is being used in universities, industry, and governments around the world,
even in Antarctica!
Members of the Qiskit community, often referred to as Qiskitters, often work
together as a solid diverse group to ensure everyone is supported. Whether they
are newbies to quantum computing or veteran quantum researchers, they all
share a passion for collaborating and connecting on various projects. The link to
information on Qiskit and the community can be found at
https://www.ibm.com/quantum/qiskit, where you will find various
links at the top and bottom of the page to tutorials and where to join the Qiskit
community and be a part of the largest quantum ecosystem in the world.
One of the early projects was to create resources for those new to quantum
computing. These resources vary from generating enablement materials to
YouTube video series. The topics included both hardware and software that
described what happened on the backend and software that described new
research that others were working on. Along with the resources, there are also
events that are planned all over the world at any given time. This includes events
such as workshops, where communities join either in person or virtually to learn
the latest in quantum computing.
Other events also include hackathons and code camps, of which the largest is
Qiskit Camp, which the IBM Quantum team hosts quarterly in different
continents around the world. The 3-to-4-day camp usually includes
accommodation in very exotic locations, meals, transportation to and from
airports, and so on. Researchers from IBM Research also participate as
lecturers, coaches, and judges. Teams are created and brainstorm ideas for

projects that they work together on during the weekend, where they would
compete and win prizes. This is very similar to hackathons.
Recently, the Qiskit community initiated the Qiskit advocate program. This
program was created to provide support to individuals who have actively been
involved with the Qiskit community and have contributed over time. To become
a Qiskit advocate, you will need to apply online
(https://www.ibm.com/quantum/community#advocates), where
you will be given an exam to test your knowledge of Qiskit and specify at least
three community contributions. These qualifications, of course, can change over
time, so it is recommended that you check the site for any updates and
application deadlines.
Once accepted into the Qiskit advocate program, you will have the opportunity
to network with other experts and access core members of the Qiskit
development team. You will also gain support and recognition from IBM
through the Qiskit community, as well as receive invitations to special events
such as Qiskit Summer School, seminars, and other major events where you can
not only collaborate with others but also lead or mentor as well.
Contributing to the Qiskit
community
Support across members is key, not just for Qiskit advocates but for all members.
The Qiskit community has set up various channels to offer support to all the
members of the community. They have a Slack workspace
(https://qisk.it/join-slack) that is very active and has various
channels so that members can ask questions, post event updates, or just chat
about the latest quantum research that had been recently published. There are
also other collaborative sources that Qiskit connects through. The current list of
collaboration tools can be found on the main quantum community page:

https://www.ibm.com/quantum/community.
Specializing your skill set in the Qiskit
community
One of the most common questions asked about contributing to the Qiskit
community, particularly those who are interested in becoming Qiskit advocates,
is, what are the various ways you can contribute? There are many ways in which
you can contribute to the Qiskit community. Ideally, you want to become
familiar with the different forms of contributions, such as the following:
Code contributions: Adding a new feature, optimizing the performance of
a function, and bug fixes are some of the good ways to start if you are a
developer. If you are new to coding, there is a label that the Qiskit
development team has created for this called good first issue. This is an
umbrella term for the issues that are ideal for those who are new to the code
base.
Host a Qiskit event in your area or virtually: You can host an event and
invite a Qiskit advocate to run a workshop or talk to a group about the latest
updates in Qiskit.
Help others: You can help others by answering questions asked by other
community members, reporting bugs, identifying features that may enhance
the development of circuits, and so on.
Specializing in an area such as noise mitigation, error correction, or algorithm
design is an advantage to the community. The Qiskit Slack community has
several channels that focus on specific areas of quantum computing: quantum
systems, the IBM Quantum Platform, Qiskit Runtime, quantum algorithms and
applications, Qiskit on Raspberry Pi, and many more. If you specialize in any of
these areas, you can join the Slack group and collaborate on many technologies
and topics.

In this section, you learned about the open-source contribution process and how
to find tasks for both beginners and experts so that everyone can contribute.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the general features and capabilities provided
by Qiskit so that you can create highly efficient quantum algorithms. You then
learned how to install Qiskit locally, as well as how to contribute and find
support from the Qiskit community.
We’ve learned more about Qiskit and how it fits on the development stack, and
we covered an overview of the application modules and simulators provided in
the Qiskit libraries. This provided you with the general skills and functionality to
create circuits, which you can then use to apply various operations to the qubits
via gates and operators.
Then, we learned about Aer, which allows us to create better simulators and how
to execute them locally and on the IBM Quantum platform.
You learned details on how you can install your own version of Qiskit on your
platform using Anaconda. Finally, we learned about the Qiskit community and
its advantages to all, particularly those who are new to quantum computing and
need a little support to understand some of the challenging content or find
someone to collaborate with and expand their horizons.
With that, you now have the skills to install and configure Qiskit on your local
machine to create and execute quantum circuits in offline mode.
In the next chapter, we will start delving into understanding the fundamental
basics of quantum computing so we can learn how to create and execute
quantum circuits.

Questions
1. In your own words, describe the difference between a kernel developer and
an application developer.
2. If you wanted to obtain the unitary matrix of a circuit, which simulator
would provide the unitary matrix result?
3. Can you name and describe in your own words each of the five simulator
categories that are provided by Aer?
4. Which module would you need to import to plot a histogram?
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

4
Understanding Basic
Quantum Computing
Principles
Quantum computing, particularly its algorithms, leverages three quantum
computing principles, namely, superposition, entanglement, and interference.
In this chapter, we’ll review each of these so that we can understand what each
provides, the effect it has on each qubit, and how to represent them using the
quantum gate sets provided to us. The quantum computers hosted on the IBM
Quantum Platform leverage all these principles using the various quantum
gates, some of which you used earlier in this book.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Introducing quantum computing
Understanding superposition
Understanding entanglement
Understanding interference
Exploring the Bell states
Technical requirements
In this chapter, some general knowledge of physics is recommended; however,
my goal is for the explanations to help you understand the quantum principles

without the need for you to register for a physics course. Here is the full source
code used throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learn-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Experience.
Introducing quantum
computing
Quantum computing isn’t a subject that is as common as learning algebra or
reading some of the literary classics. However, for most scientists and engineers
or people in any other field that includes studying physics, quantum computing
is part of the curriculum. Those of us who don’t quite recall our studies in
physics, or have never studied it, need not worry, as this section aims to provide
you with information that will either refresh your recollection of the topic or at
least, perhaps, help you understand what each of the principles used in quantum
computing means. Let’s start with a general definition of quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics, as defined by most texts, is the study of nature at its
smallest scale—in this case, the subatomic scale. The study of quantum
mechanics is not new. Its growth began in the early 1900s thanks to the efforts of
many physicists, whose names still chime in many of the current theories and
experiments. The names of such physicists include Erwin Schrödinger, Max
Planck, Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, Paul Dirac, and Albert Einstein, among
others. As the years passed, many other scientists expanded on the foundations
of quantum mechanics and began performing experiments that challenged many
of the classical theories, theories such as the photoelectric effect as well as more
modern approaches such as the wave function, which is used to provide various
physical properties of a particle.
One of the more popular experiments that have come out of quantum mechanics

is the double-slit experiment. Although this is found in classical mechanics, it is
referenced in quantum computing to describe the behavior of a quantum bit
(qubit). It is in this experiment that researchers were able to demonstrate that
light (or photons) can be characterized as both waves and particles.
Many distinct experiments have been conducted over the years that illustrate this
phenomenon, one of which was to fire photon particles through a double slit one
at a time, where at the other side of the double slit, there was a screen that
captured, as a point, the location where each particle would hit. When only one
slit was open, all the particles would appear as a stack of points directly behind
the slit, as shown in the following diagram:
Figure 4.1: Single-slit experiment (image source:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SingleSlitDiffraction.GIF)
From the previous diagram, you can see that all the particles are captured in an
area directly across the slit. Here, the angle theta indicates the angle from the
center of the slit (pattern) to the first minimum intensity.
However, when the second slit was open, it was imagined that there would be an
identical stack of points on the screen, therefore two stacks. But this was not the

case, as what was captured appeared to be a formation altogether different than
what would be expected from a particle. In fact, it had the characteristics of a
wave in that the points on the screen seemed to display a diffraction pattern, as
shown in the following diagram:
Figure 4.2: Double-slit experiment (image source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Doubleslit.PNG)
From the previous diagram, you can see that all the particles are spread out from
the center with interference gaps.
This diffraction pattern is caused by the interference of the light waves passing
through the slits. Here, there are more points at the center of the screen than
there are toward the outer ends of the observing screen. This interference of
individual particles is the basis for what is now known as wave-particle duality,
which generally infers that photons of light can behave like both a wave and a
particle. This property is used in quantum computing, particularly in algorithms
such as Grover’s and Shor’s algorithms.
This wave-particle phenomenon gave birth to lots of interesting
research and development such as the Copenhagen
interpretation, the many-worlds interpretation, and the De

Broglie-Bohm theory.
What this illustrates is that the light appeared as bands of light in certain areas of
the board with some probability. By observing the preceding diagram, you can
see that there is a higher probability that the electron fired from the gun will land
in the center band of the screen as opposed to the outer bands as illustrated by
the darker shades of gray. Also, note that due to interference, the spaces in
between the bands that capture the electrons have less probability (blank areas
between bands).
It is these effects of wave interference and probabilities that we will cover in this
chapter, but first, we will start with the electron itself to understand
superposition.
Understanding superposition
Superposition is something we generally can’t see with the naked eye. It’s
defined as a combination of two similar yet distinct phenomena occurring at
once: for example, being able to whistle and hum at the same time. Both are the
same in that they are audible waves but distinct in how they sound. You can
whistle without humming, and vice versa; however, doing them both at the same
time is placing them in a superposition as you are creating a combination of both
distinct sounds at the same time.
In quantum mechanics, we are typically discussing the superposition of an
electron. Since an electron is very small and there are so many of them, it is hard
to distinguish one with even a powerful microscope. It is commonly referred to
as an elementary particle. There are, however, some analogies in the classical
world that we can use to illustrate what superposition is. For example, a spinning
coin is what most texts use to describe superposition.
While it is spinning, we can say that it is in the state of both heads and tails. It

isn’t until the coin collapses that we see what the final state of the coin is. This
explains superposition from a probability perspective; however, the formal
definition is commonly found in any classical physics book when describing the
spin of an electron. I will leave this for you to search for as there are lots of
references and resources available online that go into detail.
In this chapter, we’re going to use this spinning coin analogy just to help you
understand the general principle of superposition. However, once we start
working on our quantum circuits, you will see some of the differences between
superposition and its probabilistic behavior in the classical world versus its
behavior in the quantum world.
Let’s start by reviewing the random effects we saw in the slit experiments in the
classical world.
Learning about classical
randomness
Previously, we discussed the randomness of a spinning coin as an example.
However, the spinning coin and its results are not as random as we think. Just
because we cannot guess the correct answer when a coin is spun on a table or
flipped in the air does not make it random. What leads us to believe that it’s
random is the fact that we don’t have all the information necessary to know or
predict or, in fact, determine that the coin will land on either heads or tails.
All the relevant information, such as the weight of the coin, its shape, the
amount of force required to spin the coin, the air resistance, the friction of the
platform the coin is rolling on, and so on, as well as the information of the
environment itself, is not known to us in order for us to determine what the
outcome would be after spinning a coin. It’s because of this lack of information
that we assume the spinning of the coin is random. If we had some function that

could calculate all this information, then we would always successfully
determine the outcome of the spinning coin.
The same can be said about random number generators. As an example, when
we trigger a computer to generate a random number, the computer uses a variety
of information to calculate and generate a so-called random number. These
parameters can include information such as the current daytime that the request
was triggered, information about the user or the system itself, and so on.
These types of random number generators are often referred to as
pseudorandom number (PSRN) generators or deterministic random bit
(DRB) generators. They are only as random as the calculation or seed values
provided that are allowed. For example, if we knew the parameters used and
how they were used to generate this random number, then we would be able to
determine the generated random number every time.
Now I don’t want you to worry about anyone determining the calculations or
cryptographic keys that you may have generated. We use these PSRN generators
because of the precision and granularity that they encompass to generate this
number, which is such that any deviation can drastically alter the results.
So, why bother reviewing the probabilistic and random nature of a spinning
coin? One, it’s to explain the difference between randomness, or what we
believe is random, in the classical world versus randomness in the quantum
world. Two, at some point we will need to leave any form of classical analogy
and accept the fact that the quantum behavior is not obvious nor easily
measured. If you wish to get a deeper understanding of these phenomena, which
we cannot easily describe using classical physics or analogies, I recommend
about reading the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
In the classic world, we learned that if we had all the information available, we
can more than likely determine an outcome. However, in the previous section,
where we described the double-slit experiment, we saw that we couldn’t

determine where on the screen the electron was going to hit. We understood the
probabilities of where it would land based on our experiment. But even then, we
could not deterministically identify where precisely the electron was going to
land on the screen. You’ll see an example of this when we create our
superposition circuit in the next section.
For those who wish to learn a little more about this photonic phenomenon, I
would suggest reading the book by the famous physicist Richard Feynman titled
QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter.
Preparing a qubit in a
superposition state
In this section, we are going to create a circuit with a single qubit and set an
operator on the qubit to set it in a superposition state. But before we do that, let’s
quickly define what a superposition state is.
We define the qubit as having two basis energy states, one of which is the ground
(0) state and the second of which is the excited (1) state, as illustrated in Figure
4.3. The state value name of each basis state could be anything we choose, but
since the results from our circuit will be fed back to a classic system, we will use
binary values to define our states—in this case, the binary values 0 and 1. To say
that the superposition of two states is being in both 0 and 1 at the same time is
incorrect. The proper way to state that a qubit is in a superposition state is to say
that it is in a complex linear combination of states where, in this case, the states
are 0 and 1.
A simple analogy of this is to perhaps think of a bit as a standard light switch. In
one position the light is on, in the other position the light is off. It’s either one or
the other. This is analogous to a bit, either 0 or 1 (Off or On, respectively). Now
consider a light dimmer switch (technically, a rheostat) where the switch can be

rotated to the On position and then rotated all the way down to the Off position.
What you can also do with a dimmer is slide the switch to anyplace in between
off and on, this in turn adjusts the intensity, or amplitude, of the amount of light
emitted. Now, when you have the dimmer in between the On and Off position,
you don’t say the light is “On and Off at the same time” do you? Of course not.
It is more of a combination of the two. Keep in mind of course, this is not the
definition of a qubit, it’s just a simple example of why saying something is two
things at once is not entirely correct.
Visualizing the state of a qubit is generally difficult, particularly multi-qubit
states, which involve more than one qubit and multiple quantum states. One of
the earlier visualization models developed was the 2-state sphere that provided a
geometrical representation of a 2-level quantum mechanical system called the
Bloch sphere. The following figure is an example of a Bloch sphere, which
represents a single qubit and its two orthogonal basis states, which are located on
opposite poles. On the north pole, we have the basis state , while on the south
pole, we have the basis state . The symbols surrounding the basis state values
are the commonly used notations in most quantum computing text. This is called
Dirac notation, which was named after the English theoretical physicist Paul
Dirac, who first conceived the notation, which he called the Bra-Ket notation.
Bra-Ket and Dirac notation are generally used interchangeably as they refer to
the same thing, as we’ll see later. Each has its unique form as follows, Bra has
the following form, , and Ket has the following form, , where each denotes
a mathematical linear form and vector, respectively.

Figure 4.3: Two basis states of a qubit on a Bloch sphere
OK, so let’s stop talking, and let’s start coding. We’re going to create a quantum
circuit with a single qubit. We will then execute the circuit so that we can obtain
the same result we can see in the preceding screenshot, which is the initial state
of the qubit, state .
Before we get started, let’s first import the helper file into your working
directory. It contains a series of functions that will help us in two ways. First, it
will provide a series of functions we can use to quickly get us started to execute
circuits without having to cover any details just yet. But not to worry, you will
learn the details as we progress throughout the book, and the dependency of the
helper file will surely disappear. Second, this will also help keep the code base
up to date as new features and changes happen, so that updates can be made to
keep code running far beyond the current version. The location of the helper file
is in the GitHub repo linked at the beginning of this chapter, titled
helper_file_1.0.ipynb. Be aware that you may need to set up your
account if you want to use a quantum system and not the local simulators on
your device. If so, please open the setup_save_account.ipynb file and
enter your API token in the specified attribute and run the file. Once you do, that
will save your API on your local machine, so you won’t have to set up each time.
Open a new Qiskit Notebook and enter the following code into the next empty
cell:

# Load helper file
%run helper_file_1.0.ipynb
# Create a simple circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1,1)
# Get the state vector of the circuit
stateVectorResult = Statevector(qc)
# Display the state vector results onto a Bloch s
phere
plot_bloch_multivector(stateVectorResult)
The first line will load the helper file into the working notebook. The file
contains functions that we will use to import the functions and libraries we need
to get started, such as those needed for executing circuits on simulators and
backend systems and returning the results of our circuits. The next line creates a
quantum circuit that includes 1 qubit and 1 classical bit, and in the next line we
will pass the quantum circuit to the Statevector object, which will generate
the state vector of the quantum circuit. This will return the resulting object,
which will contain the state vector results. Finally, we display the results on a
Bloch sphere, which should display what you saw in Figure 4.3.
Each qubit, as mentioned earlier, is made up of two basis states, which, in this
example, reside on opposite poles of the Bloch sphere. These two basis states are
what we would submit back to the classical system as our result—either one or
the other. The vector representing these two points originates from the origin of
the Bloch sphere, as you can see in the previous diagram or the result from your
experiment. If we were to notate this as a vector, we would write the following:
Since the opposite would apply to the opposite pole, we would notate it as
follows:

From observing the vector values, you can see that flipping the values of the
vector is like a classical bit flip. Now that we understand the vector
representation of a qubit, let’s continue and set the qubit in a superposition state:
1. Insert a new cell at the bottom of the current notebook and enter the
following code:
# Place the qubit in a superposition state
# by adding a Hadamard (H) gate
qc.h(0)
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The first line places a Hadamard (H) gate onto the first qubit,
identified by the qubit’s index value (0). It then calls the draw()
function, which will draw the circuit diagram; note that the output
parameter is added just to get a nicer output. If you would like to
include these visualization features, be sure to install
qiskit[visualization] from pip (pip install
qiskit[visualization]). Otherwise, you can remove the
parameter and get standard text visualization outputs.
After running the previous cell, you should see the following circuit
image, which represents adding the Hadamard gate to the qubit and the
classical bit just below:

Figure 4.4: Circuit with a Hadamard (H) gate added to a qubit
The Hadamard gate (H gate) is a quantum gate that places the qubit in a
superposition state, or, more specifically, a complex linear combination of
the basis states, which means that when we measure the qubit, it will have
an equal probability result of measuring a 0 or 1. Or in other words, it
would collapse to one of the basis state values of or .
Mathematically, the superposition state is obtained with the application of
the Hadamard gate, and its results are represented in the following two
superposition equations, which, as you can see, depends on which of the
two basis states, or , it was in prior to applying the Hadamard gate.
The first superposition equation is as follows and originates from the
state, which is often referred to as the positive superposition state:
The second superposition equation , originating from the state, is as
follows, which is often referred to as the negative superposition state:
Visually, on the Bloch sphere, this is equal to a π⁄2 rotation about the X
and Z axes of the Bloch sphere. These rotations are Cartesian rotations,
which rotate counterclockwise around the specified axis, in this case, the X
and Z axes.

2. Now, let’s get the state vector of our circuit, and see what the resulting
quantum state will look like, and where the state vector lands on the Bloch
sphere. In the following code, you will call the Statevector object and
pass the quantum circuit into the constructor argument, the result of
which will change the state of the qubit to a superposition state from the
initial state, which you will see in the resulting Bloch sphere’s output:
# Get the state vector of the circuit
stateVectorResult = Statevector(qc)
# Display the Bloch sphere
plot_bloch_multivector(stateVectorResult)
You should now see the results plotted on the Bloch sphere in a
superposition of and , as illustrated in the following figure:
Figure 4.5: Superposition of a qubit after 90° rotation of the basis state
As you can see in the preceding screenshot, this has placed the vector on
the positive X axis, as described previously when adding an H gate from
the basis state. One thing to note is that visually, this could also have
been done by rotating the Y axis by 90 degrees.
3. Now, let’s clear the circuit by recreating the QuantumCircuit object

with the same name. This time, we will initialize the qubit to the state
first and then apply a Hadamard gate to see what happens to the vector.
Initialize the qubit to the state and place it in a superposition. Clear
the circuit and initialize the qubit to 1 before applying a Hadamard gate:
#Reset our quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Rotate the qubit from 0 to 1 using the X
(NOT) gate
qc.x(0)
#Add a Hadamard gate
qc.h(0)
#Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
You should now see the following circuit; in this case, we have omitted the
classical bit when constructing our quantum circuit, which is why you do
not see the classical bit in the following figure:
Figure 4.6: Applying an H gate superposition to the base state
4. Now, let’s execute the circuit and plot the result on the Bloch sphere using
the same code you used to execute the previous circuit:

Figure 4.7: Superposition of a qubit after 90° rotation around the X and Z axes from the state
Do you see the difference between adding an H gate to a qubit in the
state (Figure 4.5) and adding it to a qubit in the state in the preceding
figure?
Of course, the difference is where it lands on the X axis! Because the
vector falls onto the positive X axis when applying a Hadamard gate to the
state, this is commonly notated as . This logically means that the
vector falls onto the negative X axis when applying a Hadamard gate to
the state. This is commonly notated as .
Now, look at the right side of the superposition equations and pay close
attention to the signs in between:
Notice that the signs match the direction of where the vector lands after
the Hadamard gate is applied. From the state, it moves toward the
positive (+) direction of the X axis, and from the state, it moves toward

the negative (-) direction of the X axis.
This difference is referred to as a phase difference between the two results.
This will be very important later in this and subsequent chapters, as phase
difference plays an important role in many quantum algorithms and blends
itself into the topic of interference, as we will learn shortly.
One last thing that we will discuss before moving on is to now look back
to our earlier discussion on probabilities. Now that we’ve learned what
superposition looks like in a circuit and on a Bloch sphere, let’s execute
and see what the probabilities are when we measure the qubit after it is in
superposition. As you may recall from our first analogy of flipping or
spinning a coin, we said that once the coin is spinning, it is in a
superposition of heads or tails, or in this example, 0 or 1.
Once we observe the outcome, the result of the coin will be one or the
other. However, classically, this is pseudorandom, as we learned. But in
quantum computing, electron detection is truly random as there is no way
to determine its outcome without disturbing it due to the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle.
The Heisenberg uncertainty principle, introduced by
Werner Heisenberg in 1927, describes how it is not
possible to predict the momentum of a particle from its
initial conditions if the position is more precisely
determined. The same is said for the reverse, where it is
not possible to predict the position of a particle from its
initial conditions if the momentum is more precisely
determined.
This is the same as measuring a qubit; we are, in essence, measuring it,

and therefore forcing it to collapse into one of two basis states.
5. Then, measure the qubit after it is in superposition and recreate the circuit.
Let’s start from the state and apply a Hadamard gate, as we did earlier:
# Recreate the circuit with a single qubit
and classical bit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1,1)
# Add a Hadamard gate
qc.h(0)
6. Now, using our helper function, let’s create a circuit that includes a
measurement operator so that we can measure the qubit, which will collapse
into one of two states, as follows:
# Create a measurement circuit with 1 qubi
t and 1 bit
measurement_circuit = create_circuit(1,True
)
# Concatenate the circuits together
full_circuit = qc.compose(measurement_circ
uit)
# Draw the full circuit
full_circuit.draw(output='mpl')
In the previous code, we created a measurement circuit that includes a
measurement operation that basically collapses the qubit from its current
state to that of either 0 or 1. The second line of the code then concatenates
the first circuit qc and this new measurement_circuit together,
creating a new circuit called full_circuit which will be drawn as
follows:

Figure 4.8: Full circuit with rotation and measurement from qubit (q) to classic bit (c)
The previous diagram illustrates our full circuit, which you can see now
includes two new components, the first of which is the classic register
below the quantum register. The second component is the measurement
operator, which will extract the result of the qubit and pass it onto the
classical bit. The result will collapse the state of the qubit to either 1 or 0.
7. Now, let’s run this circuit to see what results we get back. We will add a few
shots and see the results. Shots refer to running through the
experiment a few times and aggregating its results. We’ll use our helper file
to help us run this circuit:
# Run the quantum circuit and obtain resul
ts
transpiled_QC, result, stateVectorResult =
simulate_on_sampler(full_circuit, None, N
one)
counts = result[0].data.c.get_counts()
print(counts)
The previous code will now use a different backend from our helper file,
the BasicSimulator rather than the Statevector, which will
allow us to obtain the measured results of the circuit. In this case, we will
extract counts, which stores the number of times the measurement
resulted in either a 0 or 1 out of 1024 shots.

The result of the previous code is as follows:
{'1': 478, '0': 546}
Notice that the results are almost 50%, which illustrates that you can have
an equal probability of landing on either the 0 or 1 state for each shot!
Note that your actual value results might be different than what
was shown previously, but the probability should be close to
50%. Retry running the code a few times and play around with
the number of shots to see if you get any differences. The
limitation for shots can be found in the max_shots value
for each simulator and quantum system’s properties.
The reason why we run so many shots of a circuit is to get enough measurements
to obtain accurate statistics of a measurement operation on a superposition state
that is probabilistic. The noise in the system contributes to the deviation from a
perfect statistic of 50/50 in the counts, because the near-term quantum devices
used these days are not fault-tolerant yet. Fault-tolerant devices are those that
have logical qubits, which can comprise one or more physical qubits, and are
used to minimize errors so that operations complete as specified by the quantum
circuits. They exhibit very low error rates and large quantum volumes, which we
will cover in Chapter 9, Optimizing and Visualizing Circuits. Current near-term
devices need to run multiple shots to provide your quantum algorithm with good
probabilistic results.
Building a coin-flipping
experiment

If you’ve ever taken a course in probability and statistics, you might have seen
the coin flip example. In this example, you are given an unbiased coin to flip
multiple times and track the results of each flip (experiment) as either heads or
tails. What this experiment illustrates is that with an unbiased coin and enough
samples, you will see that the probability of either heads or tails starts to
converge to about 50%.
This means that, after running enough experiments, the number of times the coin
lands on heads becomes very closely equal to the number of times that it lands
on tails.
Let’s give this a try in the IBM Quantum Composer, to better visualize what’s
happening (note, backend systems might not be available or the same, so use any
backend you see available. Like most of the backends throughout this book,
we’ll be using those that were available at the time of writing this:
1. Open the Composer Editor and create a new blank circuit.
2. For simplicity, let’s remove all except one qubit. This will simplify our
results.
3. Click and drag the Hadamard gate onto the first qubit.
4. Click and drag the measurement operation onto the first qubit after the H
gate. This will indicate that you wish the value of this qubit to be measured,
and assign its resulting value of either 1 or 0 to the corresponding classic
bit; in this case, the bit at position 0, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.9: Coin flip experiment
5. Name your circuit Coin flip and save it.
6. Click Setup and run to expand the options.
7. Select a backend device and set the run count to 1024. This will run the
experiment 1,024 times. Note at the time of this writing there are some
changes occurring which might change how to run a circuit using
Composer. If so, please refer to the instructions on the platform for any
changes.
8. Click Run on ‘device selected’.
9. Once completed, click on the completed experiment in the Composer jobs
list.
The measurement outcome results will now show two different states.
Remember that the Computational basis states are represented along the X axis,
which you can see is either a 0 or 1:

Figure 4.10: Coin flip results
Another thing to note is the Frequency (the X axis) of each of the two states.
This will differ each time you run the experiment as it represents how many
times the outcome was either 0 or 1 for each shot.
What you will notice from the preceding screenshot is that the results will fall
close to 50% each time you run the experiment. Rerun the experiment a few
more times and examine the results for yourself. The use of the Hadamard gate
allows you to place a qubit on a circuit into a linear combination of the two basis
states, 0 and 1. As mentioned earlier, this helps to leverage superposition.

Understanding entanglement
The second quantum computing principle used by quantum computers is
entanglement. By entangling two or more qubits, we are, in essence, linking the
value of one qubit and synchronizing it with one or more other qubits. By
synchronizing it, we mean that if we measure (observe) the value of one of the
entangled qubits, then we can be sure that the other qubit will have the same
value, whether we measure it at the same time or sometime later.
Entanglement is probably one of the most interesting of the three quantum
computing principles. This is mainly because it still baffles physicists to this day,
with many taking different philosophical sides in the discussion. I won’t bore
you with the details, but I will aim to provide you with enough information for
you to understand what entanglement is, but not to have a way to prove it to
create quantum algorithms and applications. Yes, it sounds confusing, but
believe me, the devil is in the detail and there just isn’t enough space for us to
formulate a comprehensive answer to how entanglement works. But enough of
that—let’s get to work!
Quantum entanglement, or just entanglement, is simply defined as a quantum
mechanical phenomenon that occurs when two or more particles have correlated
states. What this, in essence, means is that if you have two particles or, for our
purposes, qubits, that are entangled, this means that when we measure one qubit,
we can determine the result of the other qubit based on the measurement of the
first qubit.
As you may recall from our previous example, if we put a qubit in a
superposition and we measure that qubit, we have a 50/50 split as to whether that
qubit would collapse to either of two states, or .
Now, if that same qubit were entangled with another qubit and we were to
measure one of the qubits, that qubit will be either or . However, if we

were to measure the second qubit, either at the exact same time or sometime
later, it too will have the same value as the first qubit we measured!
One thing to note is that this can also be the opposite if you so
choose it to be. For example, let’s say you set the second qubit to
the state prior to entangling. You have now entangled
opposite states. These combinations of entangled states will be
covered in more detail when we discuss quantum algorithms in
Chapter 12, Applying Quantum Algorithms.
You’re probably thinking, how can this be? If we take two qubits and place them
in superposition and we measure them separately, we will correctly see that each
qubit will collapse to a value of 1 or 0, where each time we measure the qubits
individually, it may not collapse to the same value at the same time. This means
that if we run the experiment one shot at a time, we would see that, sometimes,
the first qubit will measure 0, while the second qubit could measure 0 or 1.
Both are separate and do not know the value of each other either before, during,
or after measurement. However, if we were to entangle the two qubits and repeat
the same experiment, we would see that the qubits will measure the exact same
values each time! Each will result in one of four different outcomes of either 00,
11, 01, or 10. Each of these four is based on what is known as the Bell states,
which will be covered later in the chapter.
Impossible, you say? Well, it’s a good thing for us that we now have a quantum
computer that we can run and try this out!
Implementing the behavior of
entangled qubits

In the following code, we will see that when qubits are not entangled, their
results are such that we cannot infer what the result of one qubit would be based
on the result of the other qubit. Since we are measuring two qubits, our results
will be listed as two-bit values:
1. First, we’ll create a new circuit with two qubits, place them each in
superposition, and measure them:
#Create a circuit with 2 qubits and 2 clas
sical bits
qc = QuantumCircuit(2,2)
#Add an H gate to each
qc.h(0)
qc.h(1)
#Measure the qubits to the classical bit
qc.measure([0,1],[0,1])
#Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
In the preceding code, we created a quantum circuit with two qubits,
added an H gate to each of the qubits so that we can place each qubit into
a superposition state, and finally, added a measurement from each qubit to
its respective bit.
The result from the previous code should display the following circuit,
where we can see that each qubit has an H gate that’s measured to its
respective classical bit register; that is, qubit 0 to bit 0 and qubit 1 to bit 1:

Figure 4.11: Two qubits in superposition and measured to their respective classic bits
2. Then, we execute the circuit and display the results:
# Run the quantum circuit
transpiledQC, result, stateVectorResult =
simulate_on_sampler(qc, None, None)
#Obtain the results and display on a histo
gram
counts = result[0].data.c.get_counts()
plot_histogram(counts)
In the previous code, we created the backend to run on the simulator with
1000 shots and plot the results in a histogram to review them.
Note from the following results that the outcomes are very
random from each qubit, which is what we expected. One
thing I would also like to mention regarding notation is the
ordering of the qubits. When written, the order of the
qubits is a little different than the bit order. In quantum
notation, the first qubit is also listed on the left-hand side,
while subsequent qubits are added toward the right-hand
side. In binary notation, however, the first bit is on the
right-hand side, while subsequent bits are added toward

the left-hand side.
For example, if we want to represent the 3-qubit value of
the number 5, we would do so using , which is the
same as the bit representation of the same number.
However, the qubit order here is different as the first qubit
is listed in the left position (q[0]), the second qubit (q[1])
is listed in the middle position, and the last qubit (q[2]) is
listed in the right position.
On the other hand, in binary notation, the first bit (b[0]) is
in the right position and moves up in order to the left.
When measuring, we link the results from the qubit to the
bit (as shown in the preceding screenshot), which correctly
maps the results of each qubit to its respective binary
position so that our results are in the expected bit order.
The plotted histogram is shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.12: Random results of all combinations from both qubits
In the previous screenshot, each qubit has collapsed to a state of either 0 or
1, so since there are two qubits, we should expect to see all four random
results, which are 00, 01, 10, and 11. Your probability results might differ
a bit, but overall, they should all be close to 25% probability.
3. This is expected, so let’s entangle the two qubits and see what happens
then. For this, we will entangle the two qubits and rerun the experiment.
Let’s entangle the two qubits by adding a multi-qubit gate called a
Controlled NOT (CNOT) gate. Let me explain what this gate is before
we include it in our circuit.
The CNOT gate is a multi-qubit gate that operates on one qubit based on
the value of another. What this means is that the qubit gate has two
connecting points—one called control and another called target. The
target is generally an operator, such as a NOT (X) gate, which would flip
the qubit from 0 to 1, or vice versa.

However, the target operator can also be almost any operation, such as an
H gate, a Y gate (which flips 180° around the Y axis), and so on. It could
even be another control, but we will get into those fancy gates in Chapter
6, Understanding Quantum Logic Gates.
The CNOT gate acts in such a manner that when the qubit tied to the
control is set to 0, the value of the target qubit does not change, meaning
the target operator will not be enabled. However, if the value of the control
qubit is 1, this will trigger the target operator. This would, therefore, in the
case of a CNOT gate, enable a NOT operation on the target qubit, causing
it to flip 180° around the X axis from its current position. This is illustrated
in Figure 4.13, where qubit 0 is the control and qubit 1 is the target; in this
case, the target is a NOT gate, hence making this a CNOT gate.
The following logic table represents the control and target value updates
based on the value of the control for a CNOT gate, as well as the states
before and after the CNOT gate:
Table 4.1: Two-qubit CNOT logic table
Now that we can see how the CNOT gate works on two qubits, we will
update our circuit so that we can entangle the qubits together. In the
following code, we will create a circuit with 2 qubits where we will apply
a Hadamard gate to the first qubit and then entangle the first qubit with the
second qubit using a CNOT gate:

# Create a circuit with 2 qubits and 2 classi
c bits
qc = QuantumCircuit(2,2)
# Add an H gate to just the first qubit
qc.h(0)
# Add the CNOT gate to entangle the two qubit
s,
# where the first qubit is the control, and t
he
# second qubit is the target.
qc.cx(0,1)
# Measure the qubits to the classical bit
qc.measure([0,1],[0,1])
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The resulting diagram of the circuit should look as follows:
Figure 4.13: Entanglement of two qubits
The previous screenshot shows you that, this time, we are only placing a
Hadamard gate on the first qubit and leaving the second qubit to be
operated on only by the CNOT gate. Since qubit 1 (q1) is set as the target,
it will be dependent on the control qubit, which, in this case, is qubit 0
(q0).

4. Now, we will run the experiment and plot the results. This is similar to the
previous experiments we completed, where we will execute the circuit,
extract the result counts, and plot them on a histogram to visualize the
results:
# Run the quantum circuit
transpiledQC, result = run_qasm_circuit(qc
, None, None)
counts = result.get_counts(qc)
plot_distribution(counts)
The results shown in the following screenshot show two quantum
computing principles—the superposition of the qubits, 0 and 1, and the
entanglement—where both qubits’ (control and target) results are strongly
correlated as either 00 or 11:
Figure 4.14: Results of two entangled qubits
Let’s extend our coin-flipping example by adding another coin and entangling

them together so that when we run our experiment, we can determine the value
of one coin without having to measure the other.
Entangling two coins together
In the same way as our previous experiment, each qubit will represent a coin. In
order to do this, we will use a CNOT gate, which connects two qubits where one
is the source and the other the target.
Let’s try entangling our coins (qubits) to see how this works:
1. Open the Composer and create a new blank circuit with 2 qubits. As a
reminder, you can increase or decrease the number of qubits by selecting a
qubit and clicking on either the + or trash icon to add or remove a qubit
from the circuit, respectively.
2. Click and drag a Hadamard gate onto the first qubit, q0.
3. Click and drag the CNOT gate (round white gate with crosshairs on blue
background) onto the first qubit, q1. This will assign the control qubit to the
first qubit. When selecting the CNOT gate, the first qubit you drop it on
will be set as the control. Visually, the source control of the CNOT gate is a
solid dot on the qubit to which the gate was dragged on to (see Figure
4.15).
By default, the target will set itself to the next qubit. In this case, it will
drop to qubit 2. Visually, the target for a CNOT is a large dot with a cross
in the middle, made to resemble a target.
4. Click and drag a measurement operator onto each of the two first qubits as
shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.15: Entangled qubit circuit representing entangled coins
5. Name and save your experiment as Entangled coins.
6. Click Setup and run on the circuit to launch the Setup and run dialog.
7. Select any device from the backend selection as the backend device and
select the shots value to 1024. This will run the experiment 1,024
times, which is the default value that you can change if need be.
8. Click Run on and select whichever device you selected in the previous
step.
9. Once completed, click the Entangled coins experiment from the
Completed jobs list.
Now let’s review the results and see what happens when we entangle two qubits:

Figure 4.16: Entangled coins results
As you can see in the preceding screenshot, the results still have two states, as
they did in the previous experiment. However, one thing to observe here is the
results of the two qubits. Note that the state of both qubits is either 00 or 11.
What makes this experiment interesting is when we flipped one coin in the
previous experiment, you saw that the results were 50% (0 or 1). However, now

we are running the same experiment, but we are entangling another coin. In
effect, this results in both coins becoming entangled together and thus their states
will always be the same as each other. This means that if we flip both coins and
we observe one of the coin values, then we know that the other entangled coin
will be the same value.
Now that you are familiar with superposition and entanglement, let’s move on to
the last quantum computing principle, which is interference.
Understanding interference
One of the benefits of quantum computing is its ability to interleave these
principles in such a way that usually, while explaining one, you can very easily
describe the other. We did this earlier in this chapter with respect to interference.
Let’s review and see where we have come across this phenomenon and its usage
so far.
First, recall that, at the beginning of this chapter, we described the double-slit
experiment. There, we discussed how an electron can act as both a wave and a
particle. When acting like a wave, we saw that the experiment illustrated how the
electrons traveled and landed at certain spots on the observation screen. The
pattern that it displayed was generally one that we recognize from classic
physics as wave interference.
The pattern had probabilistic results along the backboard, as shown in the
observing screen in Figure 4.2, where the center of the screen has the highest
number of electrons and the blank areas along both sides had the least to none.
This is due to the two types of interference of the particle waves, namely,
constructive and destructive. Constructive interference occurs when the peaks
of two waves are summed up where the resulting amplitude is equal to the total
positive sum of the two individual waves.

Destructive interference occurs similarly to constructive interference except that
the amplitudes of the waves are opposite in that when summing them together,
the two waves cancel each other out.
The following diagram illustrates the constructive and destructive wave
interference of two waves when they are added together:
Figure 4.17: Constructive (left) and destructive (right) wave interferences (image source:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Interference_of_two_waves.svg)
The preceding diagram illustrates how two waves interfere with each other
constructively and destructively. The two waves toward the bottom of the
diagram represent the individual amplitudes of each wave, while the top line
represents the added amplitude values, which represent the result of the
interference between the two waves.
Now that you understand the difference between constructive and destructive
interference, how can we apply this to what we’ve learned so far? Well, if you
recall, earlier, when we placed a qubit in superposition, we had two distinct
results.
One was from the basis state , while the other was from the basis state . Do
you remember when we started at either of these two qubit basis states, where on
the X axis of the qubit the Hadamard landed? From , it would land on the
positive side of the X axis, but if we placed the qubit into superposition starting
from the state, it would land on the negative X axis.

Having the ability to place the qubit state vector on either the positive or
negative X axis provides us with a way to place the qubit in either a positive or
negative state. Very similar to the waves in the preceding diagram, which have
positive (peaks) and negative (troughs) amplitudes, qubits can also represent
similar states. Let’s simplify this by re-introducing the two Dirac notation
values, , and , where the state represents the state vector on the positive
X axis, and the state represents the state vector on the negative X axis.
These new vector definitions, which represent the vector state of a qubit in
superposition, will be used by some of the algorithms as a technique to identify
certain values and react to them using interference—techniques such as
amplitude estimation and search algorithms such as Grover’s algorithm.
In this section, we reviewed the quantum computing principle of interference.
This, along with the other two principles, superposition and entanglement, will
come in handy as you learn about how these principles are used in quantum
algorithms in ways that provide potential speed up over classical algorithms. To
do so, we will review an example that we will use throughout this book, to
understand the very foundation of all quantum algorithms, the Bell states.
Exploring the Bell states
For most of the examples in this book, you will notice that we reuse a simple
two-qubit quantum circuit to run many of our experiments. This circuit contains
two gates, a single-qubit gate, and a multi-qubit gate, a Hadamard and CNOT,
respectively.
The reason for choosing this was not random. In fact, this circuit has a name, the
Bell state. The Bell state, which was originally described in a theoretical paper
by John Bell in 1964, describes how there are four maximally entangled
quantum states between two qubits that are in a superposition state. These four

states are commonly referred to as the Bell states.
At this point, you may be wondering why this is so important. Well, if we can
prepare qubits to a particular state, in this case, the maximally entangled state,
this can help streamline the creation of various quantum circuits and algorithms.
To learn more about this, let’s first prepare the four Bell states, and perhaps,
along the way, you might see its importance and understand the significance to
some use cases such as quantum teleportation or super dense coding.
Preparing the Bell states
We’ll begin by first preparing the Bell state that we will use throughout this
book.
We’ll label each of these states as we create them, this first one being labeled as
. Preparing the Bell state entails three simple steps:
1. Prepare your two-qubit input values. For this first state, , we will use
the initialized state of :
2. Next, add a Hadamard to the first qubit. This will place the first qubit in a
superposition state:
3. Finally, add a CNOT gate, where the control is set to the qubit in
superposition. In this case, the first qubit and the target are set to the second
qubit. Doing so will ensure that when the first qubit is 1, this will trigger the
target qubit to rotate about the X axis from the state to the state, or
else it will remain in the state. This gives us our final state:

This final state is the first Bell state, , which will result in an equal
probability of either or .
The only difference between preparing the first Bell state and the others is just in
step 1, where you need to prepare your inputs. Step 2 and step 3 are the same for
all. What this means is that for a two-qubit circuit, the remaining input states in
step 1 to prepare are , , and . Luckily for us, the following formula
can be used to help us identify the remaining Bell states:
By using this formula, we can calculate that all four Bell states are as follows:
For the input state , we get the following equation:
For the input state , we get the following equation:
For the input state , we get the following equation:
For the input state , we get the following equation:
Now, let’s create these circuits by executing all the Bell states on both a
simulator and a quantum computer.

Implementing the Bell states
In this section, we will create the first two initial states, and , and leave
you to create the remaining input states:
1. We’ll begin by creating the first Bell state, . Let’s create a two-qubit
QuantumCircuit circuit, and prepare the input state, . Since all
quantum circuits are initialized to the state , we do not need to do
anything to the circuit. We’ll add a barrier to indicate the separation
between steps:
# State 1: |/+>
state1 = QuantumCircuit(2)
# Initialize input to |0,0>
state1.barrier()
2. Then, add a Hadamard gate to the first qubit:
# Prepare the Bell state
state1.h(0)
3. Add a CNOT gate where the control is the first qubit, and the target is the
second qubit:
state1.cx(0,1)
4. Finally, add measurements to all qubits and draw the circuit:
state1.measure_all()
state1.draw(output='mpl')

This will render the final circuit for our first Bell state, , as follows:
Figure 4.18: Prepared Bell state,
5. Now let’s execute this circuit with our helper function. Set the
simulator argument to specify whether you want to execute it on a
simulator or quantum system. To avoid any noise in our results, in this
example, we will run the circuit on a quantum simulator to verify that our
results are as expected:
# Execute the Bell state |/+>
transpiledQC, result, stateVectorResult =
simulate_on_sampler(state1, None, None)
# Obtain the results and display on a hist
ogram
counts = result[0].data.meas.get_counts()
plot_histogram(counts)
The results of this experiment render the following familiar output, which
confirms the first Bell state, 00:

Figure 4.19: Results for the first state,
6. We’ll now continue to represent the next state, , and confirm
the results as we did previously.
As mentioned earlier, the only difference between the four Bell states is in
the first step, which is to prepare the input states. In this case, our input
state is . We can follow the same steps as before after adding an X gate
to the second qubit:
# State 2: |/+>
state2 = QuantumCircuit(2)
# Initialize input state to |1,0>
state2.x(1)
state2.barrier()
# Prepare the Bell state
state2.h(0)
state2.cx(0,1)

state2.measure_all()
state2.draw(output='mpl')
This will result in the following circuit, which is very similar to the first
except for the added X gate in the preparation step:
Figure 4.20: Prepared Bell state,
7. As with the first Bell state, let’s execute this circuit and observe the results:
# Execute the Bell state |/+>
transpiledQC, result, stateVectorResult =
simulate_on_sampler(state1, None, None)
# Obtain the results and display on a hist
ogram
counts = result[0].data.meas.get_counts()
plot_histogram(counts)
The results from executing the preceding circuit are as follows:

Figure 4.21: Results of the Bell state,
After reviewing both results, we should note a couple of things. The first is that
we can see from the first Bell state that both qubits are equally entangled, in that
if you were to measure one qubit, let’s say the first one, then you would know
that the second qubit should be in the same state. Hence, if you measure the first
qubit and the result is 0, then without measuring, you know the state of the
second qubit.
Whether you measure the second qubit at the same time or at a later juncture, the
same can be said about the second Bell state; the only difference, in that case, is
that if you measure one qubit, then you know that the other will result in the
opposite basis state value. Hence, if the first qubit results in 0, then the second
qubit will result in 1, or vice versa.
This correlation between two qubits is the basis for two famous quantum
applications—quantum teleportation and super dense coding, where, in each,
there are two qubits that are prepared in an entangled state. This preparation of

the two qubits is represented by the Bell states, where the preparation can be in
either of the four Bell states we have just described.
When reading about use cases that describe quantum teleportation, you will hear
a similar example to this: Eve prepares a pair of entangled qubits and sends one
to Alice and the other to Bob; you’ll now know how Eve prepares the pair of
entangled qubits.
Now that we understand the Bell states and how they can be applied in
applications such as quantum teleportation and super dense coding, we’ll
continue our journey in later chapters to illustrate how quantum algorithms offer
computational advantages over classical systems.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the three quantum computing principles used
in quantum computing. You created a quantum circuit and placed a qubit in
superposition and an entangled state between two qubits in a quantum circuit.
You also understood the two types of interference, constructive and destructive,
and learned how they are notated and represented individually as qubits by
placing them in superposition to create and simulations.
You also had a sneak peek at some Qiskit development skills by leveraging some
quantum gates such as the Hadamard and CNOT gates, as well as operations
such as measurements. This will prepare you for future chapters when you will
create circuits where these gates and operations are commonly used in various
algorithms. This makes sense as these gates and operations represent the core
quantum computing principles that we have learned.
You also ran a couple of experiments: the first one was an experiment that
simulated a coin toss in which a circuit was created using the Hadamard gate,
which leveraged superposition. The second experiment also simulated a coin

toss, only we had entangled each of the two coins together. This is an expansion
of the second circuit, which included your first multi-gate, a CNOT gate. These
allowed you to examine how both superposition and entanglement results map
from your quantum circuit to the classical bit outputs. We also learned about the
Bell states, which illustrate a great example of the use and advantage we get with
quantum entanglement. These four special states that represent a linear
combination of superposition states will be used when learning about quantum
algorithms in later chapters of this book.
In the next chapter, we will learn about all the other gates, both single and multi,
to understand the operations they perform on each qubit.
Questions
1. How would you create a circuit that entangles two qubits where each qubit
is different (that is, 01, 10)?
2. Create a circuit with a multi-qubit gate, such as a Controlled-Hadamard
gate.
3. Create all 4 Bell states in a circuit.
4. What are the three quantum computation principles?
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

5
Understanding the Qubit
We are all very familiar with the classical bit, or just the bit, with respect to
current computer hardware systems. It is the fundamental unit used to compute
everything from simple mathematical problems, such as addition and
multiplication, to more complex algorithms that involve a large collection of
information.
Quantum computers have a similar fundamental unit called a quantum bit, or
qubit, as it is commonly referred to. In this chapter, we will describe what a
qubit is, both from a mathematical (computational) and a hardware perspective,
to help you understand how they are used to calculate information. We will cover
the differences between qubits and bits, particularly regarding how calculations
are defined. This chapter will then transition from single to multi-qubit states and
talk about the advantages of multi-qubit states.
We will also provide an overview of the hardware implementation of a qubit and
how qubits are used to compute information. Since we will be using the Qiskit
Runtime service to run our experiments, you will be using the superconducting
qubit systems that are available to you. The descriptions and calculations are
hardware independent; much of the information we will cover will apply to most
of the other available quantum hardware systems.
Finally, we will discuss how quantum systems read, manipulate, and control the
flow of information to and from a qubit from a classical system.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:

Comparing classical and quantum bits
Visualizing the state vector of a qubit
Visualizing the state vectors of multiple qubits
Implementing qubits on a superconducting system
Technical requirements
In this chapter, some basic knowledge of computer architecture, basic linear
algebra, and binary logic might come in handy. Knowledge of how bits are used
to calculate will be useful but is not a hard requirement as the focus will be
primarily on the qubit. Here is the source code used throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
Comparing classical and
quantum bits
In this section, we will compare and review the building blocks of a classical bit
and a few of the operations that are performed on them via classical gates. We
will then learn about the fundamental unit of a quantum computer, the qubit, and
how it is similar to the bit, yet due to its quantum computational principles,
which we learned about in the previous chapter, has a larger computational space
than the bit.
Reviewing the classical bit
Before we delve into what a quantum bit is and how it is used, let’s take a brief
moment to refresh our memories about the classical bit. Just as the quantum bit
is the fundamental building block of quantum algorithms, the bit has the same

role in classical computational systems.
In computational systems, the bit is used to define a logical state, often
referenced as either on or off, true or false, or the most commonly used option, 1
or 0. The transition between states can be applied physically either after it’s
triggered by an operation, such as the result of an AND gate, or as a result of
some input from an external entity, such as reading from an external data source.
It is usually represented using transistors, which detect voltage differences and
usually contain a threshold that determines whether the transistor is in a low (0)
or high (1) state. The voltage thresholds, usually referred to as TransistorTransistor Logic (TTL) voltage, are generally between 0 and 0.5 volts to
indicate low and between 2 and 5 volts to indicate high.
The following diagram illustrates the simple process of a NOT operation being
conducted on a bit. The bit is first initialized or set to a state, either 0 or 1. Then,
an operation is performed on the bit and, depending on the result of the
operation, the bit’s state will either change or remain the same. The information
is then available to be read and/or stored. In this example, the NOT operation
would change the state from 0 to 1 or vice versa:
Figure 5.1: NOT operation of a bit
The implementation of a bit can be in various forms: flip flops, TTL, and so on.
The information can be stored by writing the value to a persistent data repository
to be read later. Calculations using bits are usually done using a bitstring, which
is a set of individual bits combined to represent a string of 1s and 0s, usually

noted as follows:
This indicates that x is a bitstring of 4 bits, where each bit can be either 1 or 0;
for example, 0010 or 1101.
Calculations using bits are generally done using binary logic. For example, let’s
say we wanted to add two numbers; say, 2 and 3. We would simply assign the
values 2 and 3 to a variable, which is stored in binary. Then, we would add the
two numbers using binary addition and carry the values, which will result in 5,
illustrated as follows. Please create a new notebook and enter the following:
%run helper_file_1.0.ipynb
#Adding two binary numbers
two = 0b010
three = 0b011
answer = two + three
print(bin(answer))
Running the preceding code snippet in a new notebook would result in the
binary value of 5, which is 0b101. The code reads the binary values of 2 and
3 and returns the result as a binary called answer, which is printed as a binary
using the bin() function. In order to obtain the results of adding two numbers
together, classical systems use Modulo 2 arithmetic, which is the result of using
logic gates, in this case, an XOR gate. When XORing two input bits, that is,
, the input values can also be written as two binary numbers, x1 and x2; that is,
. Note that the result will work for the following input values of x1 and x2: 0+0,
0+1, and 1+0. However, when the input values of x1 and x2 are 1+1, we will
need a second qubit to carry the value, hence the result for 1+1 will be 10.
So, why did we go through such a simple example? The point was not to bore

you with a simple binary calculation; the idea was to provide a refresher about
the mechanics of what happens at the gate level when computing on a classical
system. This way, when describing the quantum system, it will help you compare
and contrast the differences regarding how information is created, calculated,
and stored. With that, we’ll move on to the next section and describe what a
qubit is.
Understanding the qubit
Similar to the bit, which we described previously, the qubit is the fundamental
unit in quantum information science. The qubit is similar to the bit in that it can
represent the same two states, namely 0 and 1, although a qubit represents a
quantum state. The value of the qubit can be read. By read, we mean we can
measure the results, which we covered in Chapter 4, Understanding Basic
Quantum Computing Principles.
They can also be manipulated to derive calculations based on operations
performed on each qubit. Recall that the state of a bit can be represented by
either a 0 or a 1. A qubit can also be represented as a complex linear combination
of 0 and 1. In order to prevent confusion and to differentiate between a bit and a
qubit, we will use Dirac notation, and , to represent the quantum version
of the aforementioned 0 and 1 states, respectively. Let’s start by visualizing a
few things to help us see the difference between the two states.
To begin, the state of a qubit is generally represented as an array or a vector that
describes the computational basis states of the qubit, which, in a Hilbert space,
is often denoted as .
A Hilbert space is, in essence, a vector space of all possible real
and complex numbers. Hilbert spaces are often applied in the
context of infinite-dimensional vector spaces, whereas Euclidean

space, for example, refers to a finite-dimensional linear space
with an inner product.
The quantum state can be presented as two basis vectors that are orthogonal to
each other, as follows:
The second vector is given as follows:
As we can see, bits and qubits are similar in that they can represent two basis
states, in this case, 0 and 1. Where the qubits differ from classical bits is that a
qubit is always in a linear combination of basis states, which is to say that they
are always in a superposition of and . More formally, this is represented in
the following format:
From the previous equation, we can say that and are complex in that the sum
of their magnitudes is equal to 1 and each squared coefficient represents the
probability amplitude, which represents the probability of measuring a or a
, of the corresponding basis state:
Another thing to know about quantum mechanics is that we cannot obtain the
values of and , even when measuring the qubit. Measuring a qubit requires a
qubit to collapse into one of the basis states of 0 or 1.
and merely provide some probabilistic information as to whether the results
would be one or the other, but this is not a certainty. This is one of the mysteries
of quantum mechanics. For now, you can conceptualize measuring a qubit as

similar to observing or collapsing a spinning coin to reveal whether it is heads or
tails. Once it’s been measured, or collapsed, you are not able to have the coin
continue spinning without restarting the experiment, so all information is lost.
You would have to repeat the full operation of spinning the coin again.
Visualizing the qubit states can be done using a simple two-dimensional plane,
where the x axis is used to denote the state and the y axis is used to denote the
state. Therefore, the vector can be used to represent the probability of each
state, which should total 1.
In this section, we covered the differences between bits and qubits. In the next
section, we will learn how to visualize qubits and their states using state vectors.
Visualizing the state vector of
a qubit
Another visual representation of a qubit and its states is the Bloch sphere,
named after the physicist Felix Bloch. The Bloch sphere is an ordinary threedimensional sphere that’s generally used as a geometrical representation of the
qubit. By this, we mean the sphere can represent a qubit’s state as a point
anywhere on the surface of the Bloch sphere. As described in the previous
chapter, the basis states are represented by the north and south poles.
Conventionally, the north pole of the Bloch sphere represents the state, while
the south pole represents the state. Any point on the surface of the Bloch
sphere can represent the linear combination of states as a unit vector from the
center (origin) to the surface of the Bloch sphere.
Since we have the quantum mechanical constraint that the total probability of the
vector must equal 1, we get the following formula:

The vector can then only rotate around the and axes of the Bloch
sphere by using the following representation:
Here, (representing the amplitude of the qubit) and (representing the phase
of the qubit) have the values (limits) and . What this
illustrates is that any point on the sphere is unique as long as the values of and
are themselves unique, where represents the colatitude to the z axis and
represents the longitude from the x axis. The quantum state is set from the
initial state after the rotations of and have been applied, as illustrated in
the following diagram:
Figure 5.2: Qubit Bloch sphere
(image source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File: Sphere_bloch.jpg)

To continue describing a qubit, we will use visuals to help illustrate some key
concepts that can be seen on the Bloch sphere. This will also help provide further
hands-on exercises for you.
Visualizing the representation of a
qubit
In this section, we will visualize the representation of a qubit state using two
visualization plotters, the Bloch sphere and the qsphere. We will begin by
creating the Bloch sphere of a qubit in the initial state of so that we can
visualize the state vector and phase of a qubit:
1. Create a new notebook and we’ll start as we would with all our notebooks
by loading our helper file first. Note, of course, if you wish to reuse the
notebook from earlier, you can do so and skip this step:
# Load the helper file
%run helper_file_1.0.ipynb
2. Next, we will create a simple circuit with just a single qubit and use the
visualization tools we imported to visualize the qubit state. We’ll import the
first one in its initial state of .
The following snippet will create the quantum circuit with a single qubit,
and then we will get the state vector simulator from our backend. We will
be using the state vector simulator to obtain the state information about the
circuit once it has finished, whereas the qasm simulator returns count
information. Finally, we will execute our circuit and get the state vector
results:
#Create a simple circuit with just one qubit

qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
3. Next, we will run our circuit on the state vector simulator and view the
results on the Bloch sphere by passing the statevectorResult object
into the argument of the plot_bloch_multivector function:
# Get the state vector result from the cir
cuit
stateVectorResult = Statevector(qc)
print('state vector results', stateVectorR
esult)
After the preceding cell has finished executing, you should have the state
vector results printed out on your console as follows.
state vector results: Statevector([1.+0.j, 0
.+0.j],
dims=(2,))
Next, we will display first on a Bloch sphere using the Statevector
objects draw function. This function is very similar to that of the
visualization method we used before, except, in this case, we can include
an argument describing which sphere to use to display the state vector
information. In this example, we are using bloch to indicate a Bloch
sphere; we’ll be using this going forward to simplify when bouncing
between Bloch sphere and qsphere. Note that we should expect to see our
state vector in the initial state of since we have not performed any
operations on the qubit.

# Display the Bloch sphere
stateVectorResult.draw('bloch')
The output that you will see from the preceding function is the Bloch
sphere with the qubit state pointed to the north pole or to the state,
illustrated as follows:
Figure 5.3: Qubit Bloch sphere state vector initialized to
4. Next, we will display the state vector results on the qsphere. In this
visualization, you will see the state vector in the same state as the Bloch
sphere shown in the preceding diagram:
stateVectorResult.draw('qsphere')
You will also see that it includes the phase of the state vector represented
by the color-shaded sphere at the bottom right, as shown in the following
output:

Figure 5.4: Qubit state vector initialized to with phase = 0
From the preceding diagram, note that the state vector at the surface of the
qsphere is pointed toward the north pole, indicating it is in the state . It
is also shaded in blue to indicate the phase of the qubit; in this case, since
we did not shift the phase, it is set to the default phase of 0 (blue, as
described in the legend wheel at the bottom right of the qsphere).
Note that all images are available in color at the following
address: [ADD COLOR IMAGE PACK URL]

This is to indicate the phase of the state vector. The color chart at the
bottom right of the preceding diagram is a reference to the phase of the
state vector, which is currently 0.
5. Now that we are familiar with the state vector of a qubit, let’s take it out for
a spin. We’ll start by flipping the vector from the initial state of to the
state of using the NOT gate and then rerun our state vector and plot the
results:
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
qc.x(0)
#Run circuit using state vector and displa
y results
stateVectorResult = Statevector(qc)
stateVectorResult.draw('qsphere')
As you can see, we are now at the state with the phase still at 0, as
illustrated in the following diagram:

Figure 5.5: Qubit state vector set to with phase = 0
6. Next, we will place the qubit into superposition by adding a Hadamard gate
and executing the circuit again. We’ll create a new circuit and include a
Hadamard gate, as shown in the following code snippet, followed by
executing the circuit and plotting the Bloch sphere of the state vector
results, which indicates the position of the state vector. In this case, it is on
the equator:
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
qc.h(0)
#Run the circuit using the state vector an

d display results
stateVectorResult = Statevector(qc)
stateVectorResult.draw('bloch')
Note that the state vector is a precise linear combination of and :
Figure 5.6: Bloch sphere superposition representation, a linear combination of and
Let’s see what this looks like on the qsphere by plotting the state vector
results.
7. Plot the state vector results on the qsphere:
stateVectorResult.draw('qsphere')
You can see the output of the previous code snippet in the following diagram:

Figure 5.7: Qubit state vector set to a linear combination of and , superposition
The results might seem a little confusing. You may be asking yourself why there
are two vectors when we only have one qubit and why they are based on the
Bloch sphere result. Shouldn’t we only see one? Well, the difference is that the
qsphere visualizes something that the Bloch sphere does not; that is, the visual
representation of the amplitude of each possible state. If you look at the size of
the ball on the surface of the previous outcome of the qsphere when we executed
either the or state, the diameter of the ball was much larger than the two
on the surface of the preceding diagram. This is because the amplitude is equal
for both and , so the size is split between the two, whereas in the previous
examples, the amplitude was purely in one of the two states.

In this section, we learned that the qubit could represent itself as a bit by using
the two basis states of 0 and 1. We also saw that it can be represented as a linear
combination of the two basis states, that is, the amplitude (longitudinal) and
phase (latitudinal).
It is by leveraging these features that quantum algorithms can provide the
potential for optimizing computational solutions much more than using classical
bits. We also saw how to visualize the state of a qubit using two Qiskit
visualization functions, the Bloch sphere and the qsphere, which provide
information such as amplitude and phase.
In the next section, we will look at how multiple qubits are presented and how to
visualize and plot both their real and imaginary components.
Visualizing the state vectors
of multiple qubits
So far, we’ve learned the various ways to represent a qubit, both as a vector
and visually on a Bloch sphere. We did something similar with the qsphere. In
this section, we will learn how to represent multiple qubits and how to represent
them in their general state. We will start by making a slight update to the
notation. A single qubit is presented as the following vector:
We can therefore represent two qubits similarly, in the following form:
From the preceding equation, you can see that the state is used to represent
multiple qubits, versus for single qubits. The difference is case sensitive:

lowercase for single qubits and uppercase for multiple qubits. The probability
amplitudes, along with the constraint by the normalization of 1, can therefore be
represented as follows:
Let’s look at an example that comprises two qubits, the first one in the state ,
as follows:
The other qubit, in the state , is as follows:
Combining the two entails taking the tensor product, which is used to describe
systems of multiple subsystems, of the two qubit states illustrated with the
symbol , as follows:
Multiplying across, we will get the following:
This results in the amplitude vectors, as follows:
Finally, another way to state multi-qubits by their tensor product is by
representing them by their product state. Here, the product state of n qubits is a
vector of size 2n. We’ll use the same two-vector example described previously.
The first is the 00 state:

The 01 state is as follows:
The 10 state is as follows:
Lastly, the 11 state is as follows:
The main takeaway from the previous equations is that we can describe two
qubits individually as two 2 x 1 column vectors. However, when we want to
represent the joint state of the full system, we represent them as a tensor product,
which produces the 4 x 1 column vector illustrated previously. This is the
mathematical representation of the quantum state, also referred to as the
computational basis state of a two-qubit system.
In the next section, we’ll briefly discuss the implementation of qubits on the IQP
systems and also discuss other technologies that are used to implement qubits.
Implementing qubits on a
superconducting system

At the beginning of this chapter, we learned that classical bits can be
implemented by various platforms that detect differences between voltages or
the phase of a current, or by the state of a flip flop. Just as a bit has different
platforms that are used for their implementation, so do qubits.
Some of the more common qubit platforms are neutral atoms, Quantum dots,
Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers within diamond, trapped ions, and
superconducting qubits. Out of these platforms, it is the superconducting qubits
that are used on the quantum devices hosted on the IQP. So, in this section, we
will cover this platform.
If you want to learn more about the other platforms, you can
review the book Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information by Michael Nielsen and Isaac Chuang, which covers
a lot of these in some detail.
A superconductor is a material made up of a combination of niobium and
aluminum that has no electrical resistance, but this can only typically be
achieved at very low temperatures, usually around 20 milli-Kelvin. The electrons
along the superconductors are therefore used as the basic charge carriers that
comprise a pair of electrons, more commonly referred to as Cooper pairs. This
is different from other conductors, which generally use single electrons. Talking
about the specifics of the quantum mechanics or superconducting behavior of the
Cooper pairs is beyond the scope of this book. However, you can find various
references in Appendix A if you are interested. For now, we can think of
superconductors as one of the components of the superconducting circuit that
makes up the qubit.
Now that we have covered how to visualize the state of a qubit using the state
vector simulator and display it on both a Bloch sphere and a qsphere, we can
move on to the next chapter, which describes all the qubit gate operators and

what effects they have on each other.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned the difference between bits and qubits and how they
are represented, both mathematically and visually. You also saw the difference
between how single and multi-qubit systems are represented, including their
mathematical representations, as well as how they are constructed and operated
on. We also covered how to visualize the qubit as a Bloch sphere and a qsphere.
You now have the skills to represent the vector states of single and multiple
qubits. You also understand the difference between representing multiple qubits
as separate entities and as part of a complete system by using the tensor products
of the qubits. This will help you to implement and operate the qubits on IBM
Quantum systems.
In the next chapter, we will cover how to perform operations on single and
multiple qubits and how those operations are triggered on the qubits of the real
devices.
Questions
1. Which would provide visual information about the phase of a qubit—the
Bloch sphere or the qsphere?
2. Can you visualize multiple qubits on the Bloch sphere? If not, then describe
why you wouldn’t.
3. Write out the tensor product of three qubit states in all their forms.
4. What is the probability amplitude of a three-qubit system?
Join us on Discord

Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

6
Understanding Quantum
Logic Gates
Quantum logic gates are very similar to their classical counterparts in that they
are used to perform operations by manipulating the qubits in such a way that the
results serve to provide a solution. Of course, that’s about as far as the
comparison can go. Classical gates transition the state of a bit from one to the
other by a single operation, in this case, flipping the bit value from 0 to 1, or vice
versa. Quantum gates, sometimes referred to as qubit gates, are different in
part because they perform linear transformations on one or more qubits in a
complex vector space to transition them from one state to another.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Reviewing classical logic gates
Understanding unitary operators
Understanding single-qubit gates
Understanding multi-qubit gates
Understanding non-reversible operators
After reading this chapter, you will have gained knowledge about the
fundamental operations that can be performed on both single and multiple
qubits. But before we dive right in, let’s discuss the format with which I’ll try to
explain each qubit gate. First, from a learning perspective, some people tend to
learn quicker when content is presented purely with mathematics; others prefer

visual aids such as graphs; others still prefer a more intuitive approach with
analogies and examples.
With that in mind, I shall do my best to ensure that each gate is presented by
combining as many of these learning styles as possible. This will be done by
providing not only the mathematical representation of each qubit gate, but also a
visual representation, and of course, the source code to run the qubit gate
operation and its result.
Technical requirements
In this chapter, we will discuss linear transformations of matrices in the Hilbert
space, so it is highly recommended that you should know the basics of linear
algebra.
Knowledge of the qubit and how its states are represented on a Bloch sphere,
QSphere, or mathematically, is recommended as this chapter will perform
complex linear transitions of those qubit states. Knowledge of basic classical
single-bit and multi-bit gates is also recommended, but not required, as there is a
refresher if needed.
Here is the full source code used throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
Reviewing classical logic gates
This section will serve as a refresher for classical logic gates such as AND, OR,
NOR, and so on. If you are familiar with this subject, you can either skim
through it to refresh your memory or skip it entirely and jump to the next
section. Otherwise, let’s get logical!

Logic gates are defined as a device, electronic or otherwise, that implements a
logical (usually Boolean) operation. Single-bit and two-bit gates have one or two
inputs, respectively. Each input bit value is a state value of either 0 or 1. The
operation carried out on the input varies by the type of gate. Each gate operation
is usually described using logic truth tables, as illustrated in the following table:
Gate Operation Input
A B
Output
Y
Graphical
Representation
Buffer Outputs the same value as
the input
0
1
0
1
NOT Reverses the input state 0
1
1
0
AND Outputs a 1 if and only if
both inputs are 1,
otherwise output is 0
0 0
0 1
1 0
1 1
0
0
0
1
OR Outputs a 0 if and only if
none of the inputs is 1,
otherwise output is 1
0 0
0 1
1 0
1 1
0
1
1
1
XOR Outputs a 1 if and only if
both inputs are different,
otherwise output is 0
0 0
0 1
1 0
1 1
0
1
1
0

NAND Outputs a 0 if and only if
both inputs are 1,
otherwise output is 1
0 0
0 1
1 0
1 1
1
1
1
0
NOR Outputs a 1 if and only if
both inputs are 0,
otherwise outputs a 0
0 0
0 1
1 0
1 1
1
0
0
0
XNOR Outputs a 1 if and only if
inputs are both either 0 or
1, otherwise outputs 0
0 0
0 1
1 0
1 1
1
0
0
1
Table 6.1: Classical logic gates
The preceding table lists some of the common classical gates, descriptions of the
operation that each gate performs on the input state, the result (output) of the
gate operation, and their graphical representations.
Let’s consider some things of note regarding classical bits that will help you later
understand the differences they have compared to quantum bits (qubits). First
is that there are only two single-bit gates, the buffer and the NOT gate. Among
these two, only the NOT gate performs a Boolean operation on the classical bit
by flipping the bit value of the input, so if the input to the NOT gate was a 0,
then the output would be a 1. On the other hand, the buffer gate simply outputs
the same value as the input. All the other gates operate on two input bit values
that output a single value, which is determined by the gate’s Boolean operation.
For example, if both input values to an AND gate are 1, it will output a 1.

Otherwise, the output will be 0.
One problem, however, particularly with regard to the two-bit gates, is that if
you only have access to the output, then the information about the input is lost.
For example, if you obtain the result from an AND bit and the value is 0, could
you tell what the input values were for A and B (the inputs)? Unfortunately, the
answer to this question is no. The input information is lost because the output
does not include any information about the input value, which renders the gates
irreversible. Likewise, with other two-bit gates, if I gave you just the output
value of the gate, you could not tell me with 100% certainty what the input
values were.
Reversibility is a unique property that qubit gates have, in that you can reverse
the operation of the qubit gate to obtain the previous state. This is also because
the second postulate of quantum mechanics states that transformations between
quantum states must be unitary, therefore reversible. We see this when we apply
a Hadamard gate to a single qubit in the ground state 0; if we apply another
Hadamard gate after the first one, then the state of the qubit returns to the ground
state 0.
And finally, to close our discussion on classical gates, we’ll discuss universal
logic gates. These gates are the type of gates used to create other logic gates.
NOR and NAND gates are good examples of universal gates in that they can be
used to create NOT and AND gates. Let’s take a look at the following diagram
that illustrates creating a NOT gate (inverter) by using a NAND gate:
Figure 6.1: Using a NAND gate to create a NOT gate
As you can see, by wiring both inputs of the NAND gate together, forming a
single input (A), this logically creates a NOT gate that flips the value of the

input. Computational systems having universal gates is an important feature as it
provides the ability to compose complex logical circuits to solve problems. This
of course led to the creation of integrated circuits, which are specialized circuits
used to compute problems or to perform specific operations such as an adder or a
counter, respectively.
Now that we have reviewed the functionality of classical gates, we can continue
to the next section where we will cover the basics of quantum logic gates. There,
we will also see some similarities and some unique properties that they display
with regard to the classical bit.
Understanding quantum
unitary operators
Unitary operators are defined as a unitary transformation of a rigid body
rotation of the Hilbert space. When these unitary operators are applied to the
basis states of the Hilbert space, for example, the and state, the results
transform the state vector position but it does not change its length. Let’s see
what this means for a qubit. The basis states of a qubit are mapped on the Hilbert
space as described in Chapter 5, Understanding a Qubit,
and , where , and are linear transformations that
preserve orthogonality over unitary transformations. We’ll wrap our heads
around this definition a bit by looking at this mathematically first.
A linear transformation on a complex vector space can be described by a 2x2
matrix, U:
Furthermore, if we obtain the complex transpose of the matrix U as , by
transposing the matrix U and applying the complex conjugate, as illustrated:

Then we can say that the matrix U is unitary if , where I represents the
Identity matrix , as shown here:
An intuitive way to think of this is to just imagine unitary transformation simply
as rotations of the complex vector space that preserve the length of the original
vector. The rotation of the complex vector space further ensures that quantum
transformations are not just unitary operations but are also reversible
operations as they would rotate around a specified axis.
Reversibility of quantum gates is realized by unitary transformations. As seen
in the previous unitary equation, if you have a unitary operator U applied to a
qubit via a gate, then by applying the complex conjugate of the unitary
operator to the qubit via a second gate, the result would be equivalent to
applying an Identity matrix to the original vector.
An example of this would be if you were to trigger an operation that would
rotate the vector space around the x axis by an angle π, and you then apply the
complex conjugate of that operation, then you’ll return to the original position
from which you started. This reversible functionality is something that is not
possible with some classical-bit gates we mentioned earlier, such as an AND
gate.
With quantum unitary transformations, there is no loss of information. Should
you need to return to the previous state, you would merely have to use their
conjugate transpose, in reverse order, and you’d get back to where you originally
started. We will see some interesting examples of reversibility in all gates.

There is a special case operator that is not reversible, the
measurement operator, which we will learn about in the
Understanding non-reversible operators section.
Now that we understand unitary and reversible operators, we can get down to
learning about quantum gates.
Understanding single-qubit
gates
Before we start digging into the description of quantum gates, let’s simplify the
format so it’s easy to both understand and reference. Intuitively, the easiest way
to imagine the operation of each gate is by rotating the vector that ends on the
surface of the Bloch sphere around a specified axis. Recall as well that the Bloch
sphere always starts with the unit vector set to the initial state. The initial state is
set when the quantum circuit is first created; in this case, it is initialized to the
basis state (the north pole of the Bloch sphere), as illustrated in the following
diagram:

Figure 6.2: Bloch sphere representation of the basis state
One thing that will help us understand some of the labels we will see in the
gate’s truth table is to define the values of each axis, where each axis is referred
to as basis elements. For example, we can see from the previous figure that the z
axis has the north pole labeled as and the south pole as . These two points
form the computational basis elements for the basis state vectors and .
However, we do not yet have labels for the x or y axes. Let’s define them now.
Each basis element (axis) has a positive and negative side that originates at the
center of the Bloch sphere. Each basis has a name associated with each axis:
Computational for the z axis
Hadamard for the x axis
Circular for the y axis
The x basis has a label defined as follows:
The -x basis has a label defined as follows:
The y basis has a label defined as follows:
The -y basis has a label defined as follows:
The z basis has a label defined as follows:
The -z basis has a label defined as follows:

The labels are also illustrated at the ends of each axis in the following Bloch
sphere diagram, where the dotted line indicates the negative direction of the axis:
Figure 6.3: Basis state labels of each axis of a Bloch sphere
Each gate we apply in the code snippets will operate on the qubit starting from
the initial | state. There are some gates you will see that we will have to
prepare into a superposition state using an H gate to see the effects.
In this case, by transitioning the vector down onto the x axis, and then applying a
Z gate rotation, you can then more clearly see the rotation take effect. Details on
how this is done will be in the description of—yes, you guessed it—the Z gate.
But for now, let’s open the helper file and review one of the functions that will
help us visualize the gates without having to write so much code, and handle
some of the repetitive functions such as executing and visualizing the circuits.
This way, we will just create the quantum circuits, add the gates, and execute the
circuits using a function that will return the results and the images to visualize
the results and the circuit diagrams. To start, let’s review the function titled
execute_circuit_sv from our helper file that will handle this:
# Will run the circuit on the state vector (sv) s

imulator
# Returns state vector results, circuit diagram,
BlochSphere and QSphere
def execute_circuit_sv(quantum_circuit):
#Get the state vector results
statevectorResults = run_sv_circuit(quantum_c
ircuit)
#Draw the circuit diagram
circuit_diagram = quantum_circuit.draw(output
="mpl")
#Draw the QSphere
q_sphere = statevectorResults.draw('qsphere')
#Draw the Bloch sphere bloch_sphere = sta
tevectorResults.draw('bloch')
#Return the results, circuit diagram, and QSp
here return statevectorResults, circuit_diagr
am, q_sphere, bloch_sphere
The preceding code will return the four components: state vector results, the
circuit diagram, and both the QSphere and the Bloch sphere. We will use each of
these to illustrate each state vector result, each gate on a circuit, and the visual
representation.
Now we can focus on the quantum gates and their effect on the qubits, and not so
much on executing the circuits or displaying the results.
Hadamard (H) gate
The H gate is one of the most commonly used quantum gates. It’s not surprising
as this is the gate that places the quantum state of the qubit into a complex linear
superposition of the two basis states. This is what establishes the superposition
of all qubits that are leveraged by most quantum algorithms. It is denoted as

follows:
The following truth table illustrates that the operation rotates the state vector of
the qubit along the x axis and z axis by (90°), causing the state vector to be
in a complex linear superposition of and :
Table 6.2: Truth table of a Hadamard operation
Let’s continue and create a new notebook and add a circuit using these steps:
1. First, we add an H gate to the qubit, and execute it on the backend, the same
as we did in the previous example:
# Load helper file
%run helper_file_1.0.ipynb
#H-gate
#Create the single qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Add an H gate to the qubit
qc.h(0)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)

2. Let’s examine the state vector results by running the following cell:
result
This prints out the following state vector values of the qubit:
Statevector([0.70710678+0.j, 0.70710678+0.j],
dims=(2,))
3. To draw the circuit diagram for the H gate, run the following in a cell:
img
This displays the circuit diagram with the H gate added to the qubit, as
shown in the following diagram:
Figure 6.4: Circuit diagram with an H gate
4. Now to view the Bloch sphere representation, run the following in a cell:
bloch_sphere
5. The Bloch sphere representation has changed into a superposition state,
which means it will have an equal probability result of or .

Figure 6.5: H gate Bloch sphere
6. To view the QSphere representation, run the following in a cell:
qsphere
The QSphere, as you can see, has an equal probability of being either
or . The tip of the vectors, as you’ll notice, have the same diameter,
indicating visually that both have equal probability:

Figure 6.6: H gate QSphere representation
The Hadamard (H) gate is a unique gate. We will see this gate many more times
in this chapter and future chapters—having the ability to negate a state vector,
also referred to as a phase kick, is very useful in many quantum algorithms.
Pauli gates
The first group of single-qubit gates we will discuss are commonly referred to as
Pauli matrix gates, named after the physicist Wolfgang Pauli. The complex
matrix representation of the four gates, I, X, Y, and Z, are defined as 2 x 2
complex matrices, which are both Hermitian and unitary and are represented by
the Greek letter sigma , respectively. When the conjugate
transpose of a complex N x N matrix is equal to itself, then such a matrix is
known as a Hermitian matrix.

Note that the Identity matrix is subscripted with a 0, and the x, y,
z subscripts can also be represented as .
We’ll start with the easiest of the gates, the Identity gate.
Identity (I) Pauli gate
The I gate, also known as the Identity gate, is a gate that does not perform any
operation on the qubit. It does not change the state of the qubit. Mathematically,
this is represented as an Identity matrix, hence the name of the gate. This
equation is given as follows:
The truth table for this gate shows that the input and output have the same state:
Table 6.3: Truth table of Identity gate
The idea of an Identity gate is generally used mathematically to illustrate certain
properties of operations, as we did earlier in this chapter to prove that unitary
operators are reversible. In that example, the Identity matrix was used to
illustrate that multiplying a unitary operator with its complex conjugate would
produce the same output as applying no operation, or an Identity matrix, to the
qubit.
Let’s move on to the next gate section.
NOT (X) Pauli gate
The X gate is also called the NOT gate because of the similar effect it has on the

basis states as its classical-bit gate counterpart. One notable difference is that the
X gate moves the state vector from one basis state to the other, as illustrated in
Table 6.4. Visualizing this operation can be seen via the Bloch sphere result as a
rotation of the vector from the initial state, . Because of its spherical
presentation, we refer to operations as rotations around some axis, in this case,
the X gate is a π (180° ) rotation about the x axis, which is represented by the
Pauli X-gate operator as follows:
The following truth table illustrates that the operation rotates the input around
the x axis by (180), hence if the input is , then the output is , and vice
versa:
Table 6.4: Truth table of X (NOT) gate
Let’s now create a circuit by following the next steps to include in our notebook:
1. First, add an X gate to it, and execute it using our helper function to do the
heavy lifting for us:
#X-gate
#Create the single qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Add an X gate to the qubit
qc.x(0)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu

te_circuit_sv(qc)
2. Let’s examine the state vector results by running the following cell:
result
This prints out the state vector values of the qubit, which we expect should
represent , where a=0 and b=1, as shown in the
following result:
Statevector([0.+0.j, 1.+0.j], dims=(2,))
3. Then, to draw the circuit diagram for the X gate, run the following in a cell:
img
This displays the circuit diagram with the X gate added to the qubit, as
shown in the following diagram:
Figure 6.7: X gate
4. Now, to view the Bloch sphere representation, run the following in a cell:
bloch_sphere
5. The Bloch sphere representation has changed the state of the qubit from
to :

Figure 6.8: X gate Bloch sphere
6. Now, to view the QSphere representation, run the following in a cell:
qsphere
The QSphere represents the transition of the quantum state of the qubit
from to :

Figure 6.9: X gate QSphere
As we have seen, the X gate serves as a good example that quantum gates can
also be used to perform the same operations as classical gates. One other thing
you will notice from the QSphere result is the color wheel that represents the
phase of the state vector, which in this case is blue to indicate it’s in phase (0).
Y Pauli gate
The Y gate is a rotation around the y axis by (180°), shown as follows:
Here, the following truth table illustrates that the operation rotates the input
around the y axis by (180°), hence if the input to the gate is , then the output
from the gate is and vice versa; note the phase difference where has the

phase at i, and has a phase shift, indicated by the -i:
Table 6.5: Truth table representing phase rotation of the y axis
Let’s now create a circuit by using the following steps:
1. First, add a Y gate to it, and execute it using our helper function, which
provides the quantum circuit and the visual representations of each circuit
we execute:
#Y-gate operation on a qubit
#Create the single qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Add a Y gate to the qubit
qc.y(0)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults returned
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)
2. Let’s examine the state vector results by running the following cell:
result
This prints out the state vector values of the qubit:
Statevector([0.-0.j, 0.+1.j], dims=(2,))

3. To draw the circuit diagram for the Y gate, run the following in a cell:
img
The preceding code displays the circuit diagram with the Y gate added to
the qubit, as shown in the following diagram:
Figure 6.10: Y gate
4. Now, to view the Bloch sphere representation, run the following in a cell:
bloch_sphere
5. The Bloch sphere representation has changed from to ; however, the
rotation was done around the y axis as opposed to the x axis, and the result,
in this case, is the same.
Figure 6.11: Y gate Bloch sphere

6. To view the QSphere representation, run the following in a cell. Of course,
you can also use bloch_sphere to view the Bloch sphere:
qsphere
The QSphere, as you can see, has transitioned the state of the qubit from |
to | . Note that the colors indicating states might be different based on
your system settings or as they could change over time in the code itself
when visualized:
Figure 6.12: Y gate QSphere
The Y gate, as we can see from the results, operates very similarly to the X gate,
at least when the origin of the state vector is the same.
Now, let’s proceed to the final Pauli gate.

Z gate
The Z gate is also commonly referred to as a phase gate, mostly because rather
than rotating along the vertical axis as the X and Y gates do, the Z gate rotates
along the longitude of the Hilbert space, hence the phase of the Hilbert space.
This is denoted as follows:
The following truth table illustrates that the operation rotates the input around
the z axis by (180°). If the rotation initializes from the basis state, then the
phase does not change; however, if the input initializes from the state, then
the output is a phase shift of p to . This negation is a very important feature
that you will see in many quantum algorithms:
Table 6.6: Truth table of a phase shift around the x axis
Let’s now create a circuit for the Z gate:
1. First, we place the qubit into a superposition state using the H gate, and
then add a Z gate operator to it:
#Z-gate
#Create the single qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Add an H gate to the qubit to set the qub
it in #superposition
qc.h(0)
#Add a Z gate to the qubit to rotate out o
f phase by π/2

qc.z(0)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)
2. Let’s examine the state vector results by running the following cell:
result
This prints out the state vector values of the qubit. Note that depending on
how you have things set up, the very small values may be truncated to 0. If
this is not set, you may see a very small value, such as
0.00000000e+00j:
Statevector([ 0.70710678+0.j, -0.70710678+0.j
], dims=(2,))
3. To draw the circuit diagram for the Z gate, run the following in a cell:
img
This displays the circuit diagram with the H gate removed, so don’t think
you have to include the H gate in order to use the Z gate—as mentioned
earlier, the H gate was just added to illustrate the operational effect of the
gate:
Figure 6.13: Circuit diagram with a Z gate

4. Now, to view the Bloch sphere representation, run the following in a cell:
bloch_sphere
5. The Bloch sphere representation has changed into a superposition state
between and ; however, it is on the negative side of the x axis.
Figure 6.14: Z gate Bloch sphere
6. To view the QSphere representation, run the following in a cell:
qsphere
The QSphere, as you can see, has an equal probability of being | and | ;
however, the | state you see is out of phase by , as illustrated in the
following output:

Figure 6.15: Z gate QSphere representation after first applying an H gate
As you can see in the preceding diagram, the Z gate provides a way to perform a
phase shift on a qubit, causing the state of the qubit to change its sign from
positive to negative. If you want to see this for yourself, then try the following.
Recall the code you ran earlier to execute an X gate. In that example, we started
with the qubit initially at the basis state | , and we then applied an X gate that
resulted in the state | . Now, add another line after adding the X gate and
include the Z gate. You’ll notice that the result is the same, | , only now you’ll
notice that the state result is negative. I’ll leave it to you to try it out for yourself
and observe the difference.

Let’s move on to the next section, where we will discuss phase gates.
Phase gates
Phase gates are what we use to map | to | , where is Euler’s equation.
This does not have an effect on the probability of measuring a | or a | ;
however, it does affect the phase of the quantum state. This may not make sense
just yet, but once you start learning about some advanced features that leverage
phase shifts, it will be very clear. For now, let’s learn about the gates that operate
the various phase shifts on a qubit.
S gate
The S gate is like a Z gate; the only difference is the amount by which the state
vector is rotating. For the S gate, that rotation is . The matrix representation
of the S gate is described here:
The following truth table illustrates that the operation rotates the input around
the z axis by (90°), hence if the input is | , then the output is a phase shift
of :
Table 6.7: Truth table representing phase rotation S
We will follow these steps to create a circuit with an S gate:
1. The truth table is best illustrated by placing the vector onto the x axis first;

we will add an H gate first before appending the S gate:
#S-gate
#Create the single qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Add an H gate to the qubit to drop the ve
ctor onto the #X-axis
qc.h(0)
#Add an S gate to the qubit
qc.s(0)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)
2. Let’s examine the state vector results by running the following cell:
result
This prints out the state vector values of the qubit:
Statevector([7.07106781e-01+0.j, 4.32978028e-
17+0.70710678j], dims=(2,))
3. To draw the circuit diagram for the S gate, run the following in a cell:
img
This displays the circuit diagram where we added an H gate to induce
superposition and then apply the S gate to the qubit, as shown in the

following diagram:
Figure 6.16: Circuit with an S gate
4. Now, to view the Bloch sphere representation, run the following in a cell:
bloch_sphere
5. The Bloch sphere representation has changed into a superposition state,
which means it will have an equal probability result of or but with a
phase shift of :
Figure 6.17: S gate Bloch sphere
6. To view the QSphere representation, run the following in a cell:
qsphere
The QSphere, as you can see, has an equal probability of being and
with a phase shift of :

Figure 6.18: S gate, phase rotation on the QSphere
As the S gate transitions the state to the positive Z axis by , we will now see
how to transition the state to the negative Z axis by .
S† (dagger) gate
The gate is the same as the S gate, except it rotates in the opposite, or
negative, direction. Hence the results are the same, but negated. The matrix
representation illustrates this by including the negative in the phase shift:
The following truth table illustrates that the operation rotates the input around
the z axis by (-90). As with the S gate, if the input is the state, then the
output is , but if the input is the state, the output is a phase rotation in the

negative direction:
Table 6.8: Truth table representation of phase gate
This is best illustrated by placing the qubit into a superposition first with an H
gate. We then create a circuit diagram for gate by using these steps:
1. We will add an H gate first before appending the (sdg) gate:
#Sdg-gate
#Create the single qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Add an H gate to the qubit to drop the ve
ctor onto the #X-axis
qc.h(0)
#Add an S† gate to the qubit
qc.sdg(0)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)
2. Let’s examine the state vector results by running the following cell:
result
This prints out the state vector values of the qubit:

Statevector([0.70710678+0.j, 4.32978028e-17-0
.70710678j], dims=(2,))
3. To draw the circuit diagram for the gate, run the following in a cell:
img
This displays the circuit diagram with the gate added to the qubit, as
shown in the following diagram:
Figure 6.19: Circuit with an gate
4. Now, to view the Bloch sphere representation, run the following in a cell:
bloch_sphere
5. The Bloch sphere representation has changed into a superposition state,
which means it will have an equal probability result of or with a
phase shift of or .

Figure 6.20: gate Bloch sphere
6. To view the QSphere representation, run the following in a cell:
qsphere
The QSphere, as you can see, has an equal probability of being and
with a phase shift of or :

Figure 6.21: gate, phase rotation on the QSphere
Now that we have created the circuit with an gate and can shift the phase of
the qubit in opposite directions and are not limited to a single direction to apply
phase shifts, we will move on to the next section, which will help us understand
how to create a circuit with a T gate.
T gate
The T gate is the same as the S gate, only the rotation is . The matrix
representation of the gate is as follows:
The following truth table illustrates that the operation rotates the input around

the z axis by (45°), hence if the input is the state, then the output will be
the same. If the input is , however, then the output would be a phase rotation
of :
Table 6.9: Truth table representation of phase gate T
As with all phase gates, it’s best to begin in a superposition state, so we will start
by including a Hadamard gate, then we will create a circuit using the T gate, as
illustrated in the following steps:
1. First, we add an H gate before appending the T gate:
#T-gate
#Create the single qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Add an H gate to the qubit to drop the ve
ctor onto the #X-axis
qc.h(0)
#Add a T gate to the qubit
qc.t(0)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)
2. We then examine the state vector results by running the following cell:

result
This prints out the state vector values of the qubit:
Statevector([0.70710678+0.j , 0.5+0.5j], dims
=(2,))
3. To draw the circuit diagram for the T gate, run the following in a cell:
img
This displays the circuit diagram with the T gate added to the qubit, as
shown in the following diagram:
Figure 6.22: Circuit representation of the T gate
4. Now, to view the Bloch sphere representation, run the following in a cell:
bloch_sphere
5. The Bloch sphere representation has changed into a superposition state,
which means it will have an equal probability result of or , and
transitioned the phase of the state by .

Figure 6.23: gate Bloch sphere
6. To view the QSphere representation, run the following in a cell:
qsphere
The QSphere, as you can see, has transitioned the phase of the state by
:

Figure 6.24: T gate, phase rotation on the QSphere
Similar to the S gate, we will want to rotate in all directions, so let’s take a look
at a phase gate that transitions the state of the qubit in the opposite direction.
T† (dagger) gate
The gate has the same phase rotation as the T gate, that is, , only in the
opposite direction. Its matrix representation is given as follows:
The following truth table illustrates that the operation rotates the input around
the z axis by (-45 °), so if the input is | , then the output is | . If the
input is | , then the output is a negative rotation of :

Table 6.10: Truth table representation of phase gate
This too is best illustrated by placing the vector onto the x axis first, so we will
create a circuit using the gate by following these steps:
1. First, we add an H gate before then appending the (tdg) gate:
#Tdg-gate
#Create the single qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Add an H gate to the qubit to drop the ve
ctor onto the #X-axis
qc.h(0)
#Add a Tdg gate to the qubit
qc.tdg(0)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)
2. Next, we examine the state vector results by running the following cell:
result
This prints out the state vector values of the qubit, where you will notice
that the imaginary number is now negative:

Statevector([0.70710678+0.j , 0.5 -0.5j], dim
s=(2,))
3. To draw the circuit diagram for the gate, run the following in a cell:
img
This displays the circuit diagram with the gate added to the qubit, as
shown in the following diagram:
Figure 6.25: Circuit representation using a gate
4. Now, to view the Bloch sphere representation, run the following in a cell:
bloch_sphere
5. The Bloch sphere representation has changed into a superposition state,
which means it will have an equal probability result of or , and has
transitioned the state of the qubit by .

Figure 6.26: gate, phase rotation on the Bloch sphere
6. To view the QSphere representation, run the following in a cell:
qsphere
The QSphere, as you can see, has transitioned the state of the qubit by
:

Figure 6.27: gate, phase transition on the QSphere
The preceding gates, as you might have noticed, have predetermined rotation
angles from the horizontal or vertical axis to help you set the state of the qubit. If
you wish to specify the angle of rotation yourself, the following rotation gates
allow you to specify the angle by which to rotate around a given axis. Like the
other gates, these rotation gates are also reversible and unitary.
Rx gate
You can think of Rx gates as your custom rotation gates. Note that I used the
term rotate and not flip. This is because visualizing the operation of the quantum
gates is usually done via the QSphere.
Because of its spherical presentation, we refer to operations as rotations around
the axis by (we will see this clearly in the following code

examples):
By applying a Y rotation, we get the following formula:
Finally, a Z rotation will yield the following formula:
We’ll create a circuit using one of the rotation gates – let’s go with the Rz gate:
1. First, we will rotate along the z axis by . We’ll be using the math
library to import pi, and our friendly H gate will be applied to help
illustrate the phase shift:
#Rz-gate
#Create the single qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Import pi from the math library
from math import pi
#Add an H gate to help visualize phase rot
ation
qc.h(0)
#Add an RZ gate with an arbitrary angle th
eta of pi/6
qc.rz(pi/6, 0)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)

2. Next, we examine the state vector results by running the following cell:
result
This prints out the state vector values of the qubit:
Statevector([0.06830127-0.1830127j, 0.6830127+
0.1830127j], dim=(2,))
3. To draw the circuit diagram for the Rz gate, run the following in a cell:
img
This displays the circuit diagram with the Rz gate added to the qubit, as
shown in the following diagram:
Figure 6.28: Circuit representation using an Rz gate
4. Now, to view the Bloch sphere representation, run the following in a cell:
bloch_sphere
5. The Bloch sphere representation has changed into a superposition state,
which means it will have an equal probability result of or and has
rotated the state by a phase of .

Figure 6.29: RZ gate Bloch sphere
6. To view the QSphere representation, run the following in a cell:
qsphere
The QSphere, as you can see, has transitioned the state by a phase of :

Figure 6.30: RZ gate QSphere transitioned phase of π/6
These rotation gates help us provide specific gate rotations around each axis.
There are other universal gates that imitate the function of a custom gate using a
more general alternative, so let’s review them next.
Universal U gate
The U gate, as mentioned earlier in the book, is used in order to define a
universal quantum system where you would need to ensure that the quantum
system adheres to certain criteria, the most popular of which are the DiVincenzo
criteria one of which states that it should have a universal set of quantum gates.
We discussed how, in a classical system, both NOR and NAND gates are
considered classical universal gates. In a quantum system, the U gate is defined

as a universal gate, due to its ability to provide multiple degrees of freedom to
rotate about the Hilbert space of a qubit. The U gate has parameter fields that
determine how much the state vector should move along the given axis. Let’s
look at them individually first, and then we’ll apply each gate to a qubit to
examine the results.
The U gate has three parameters that are applied as rotations on all axes, that is,
the x axis, y axis, and z axis, respectively. The matrix representation of the U
gate is defined as follows:
In the preceding equation, , , and are the angles of rotation in radians as
described in the preceding equation. Note that for the U gate to remain
a unitary operation, that is, , the angles must be confined to the range
, and . We can also see these ranges in the U matrix, where these
values lie in the arguments of the matrix, which leaves the phase l to also have a
range of .
Let’s create a circuit that implements the U gate:
1. First, we will create a single-qubit circuit and apply the U gate to it with
each angle set to . We’ll reuse our state vector helper function,
execute_circuit_sv, so we can extract the state vector results, and
the QSphere to visualize the state vector:
#U-gate
from math import pi
#Create a single qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
#Add a U gate and rotate all parameters by
pi/2, and #apply it to the qubit

qc.u(pi/2, pi/2, pi/2, 0)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)
The result value we shall see is set to the following:
Statevector([7.07106781e-01+0.j, 4.32978028e-
17+0.70710678j], dims=(2,))
Note that for convenience, I replaced the value 4.32978028e-17 from
the results with a 0, because the number is too small and insignificant.
2. The expected circuit diagram for U is as follows, with the parameters listed
at the bottom:
Figure 6.31: The U gate set with all rotation parameters to
3. Now, to view the Bloch sphere representation, run the following in a cell:
bloch_sphere
The Bloch sphere representation has changed so that the state is set after
all parameters have applied the specified rotation.

Figure 6.32: U gate, Bloch sphere representation with all parameters set to
The QSphere representation, produced by executing the qsphere
command, is shown as follows:

Figure 6.33: The QSphere representation of the U gate set with all parameters to
As you can see, you can apply various angles to the U gate in order to set the
state of the qubit into any point in the Hilbert space. This also allows you to
initialize the state of a qubit using the U gate to set the state.
Now you know that single-qubit gates provide many ways to create a complex
linear combination of their basis states, but manipulation of a single qubit alone
is not enough to carry out the functionality that most quantum algorithms
require. One such example is quantum entanglement. This is where multi-qubit
gates come into play. Let’s learn about those in the next section.
Understanding multi-qubit
gates
As described in Chapter 5, Understanding the Qubit, two or more qubits can
combine their states by their tensor product, sometimes referred to as the
Kronecker product.
In this section, we will discuss the multi-qubit gates and how they operate on the
qubits similarly to how single-qubit gates do, which includes them being unitary
and reversible.
To keep the descriptions and examples uniform, the following descriptions of the
multi-qubit gates will be presented the same way as the single-qubit gates. We
will open the helper file again and review another function titled
execute_circuit_returns. The helper function will have a few
differences, the first of which will be the Qiskit primitive Sampler to run our
circuits. We are using this for now so that you don’t use up your quantum
hardware allotted time on these simple circuits. Save the hardware for the fun
work later in this book. Also, just like the previous helper function we used for
single qubit gates, this will return multiple values including: total counts, circuit

diagram, and histogram (or distribution) of results. Let’s review the code:
# Will execute the circuit on the Sampler primiti
ve
# Returns results, circuit diagram, and histogram
def execute_circuit_returns(quantum_circuit):
from qiskit.primitives import Sampler
sampler = Sampler()
result = sampler.run(quantum_circuit, shots=1024)
.result()
quasi_dists = result.quasi_dists
#Get the counts
counts = quasi_dists[0].binary_probabilities()
circuit_diagram = quantum_circuit.draw(output="mp
l")
#Create a histogram of the results
histogram = plot_distribution(counts)
#Return the results, circuit diagram, and his
togram
return counts, circuit_diagram, histogram
The purpose of switching over to the Sampler primitive is not that we can’t use
the state vector simulator; it’s primarily so we can observe some of the
interesting characteristics of our circuit and the gates. For those who wish to use
the state vector simulator, do not worry. There will be some challenges in the
Questions section at the end of this chapter that will allow you to use it.
Another difference you will see is that we are no longer using the Bloch sphere
or QSphere to visualize the quantum states. Rather, we will replace them with a
histogram plot of the quasi-distribution, which is a dict-like class for
representing the quasi-probabilities. For each circuit we will be creating, we will

include more than one qubit, as these multi-qubit gates all operate on two or
more qubits.
Now that we have reviewed our helper function, let’s move on to the next set of
gates, the multi-qubit gates, specifically 2-qubit gates. These include the
following:
The CNOT gate
The Toffoli gate
The Swap gate
We will learn about these gates in the following sections.
CNOT two-qubit gate
The CNOT gate, often referred to as a Control-NOT gate, is similar to the
XOR classical-bit gate in that if you provide two input states of either 0 or 1, the
results will be the same as if the input states were run through an XOR gate. The
CNOT gate is composed of two parts.
The first part is the Control, which is connected to one of the qubits, and is what
triggers the CNOT gate to perform an operation on the other qubit connected to
the other end of the CNOT gate, the Target.
The Target is an operation that will be performed on the other qubit; in this case,
it’s a NOT operation. Recall from the previous section on single-qubit gates that
the NOT gate rotates the qubit about the x axis by . The CNOT gate is one of
the more commonly used multi-qubit gates as it is how qubits get entangled.
The CNOT gate is also described as a Control-X (CX) gate since the target is
often coded as an X operation. You will see this CX gate convention when
running the following example.
The matrix representation of a CNOT gate is a 4 x 4 matrix due to the tensor

product of two qubits, as illustrated here:
Notice that the top-left 2 x 2 quadrant of the CNOT matrix represents an Identity
matrix, I, and the bottom-right 2 x 2 quadrant represents the X matrix. This
matrix describes the state when the first qubit, q0, is the Target and the second
qubit, q1, is the Control.
The following truth table illustrates that when the Control qubit (the left side of
the input vector) is 0, there is no change to the Target qubit (the right side of the
input vector). When the Control qubit is set to 1, then the Target qubit operation
is enabled and therefore rotates the Target qubit around the x axis by π (that is,
180°):
Table 6.11: Truth table representation of CNOT gate
Let’s now create a circuit, add a CNOT gate, and execute it:
1. We’ll begin by creating a two-qubit quantum circuit and applying a
Hadamard gate on the first qubit, and a CNOT gate on the two qubits,
where the Control is set to the first qubit and the Target is set to the second
qubit:
#CNOT-gate
#Create a two-qubit circuit

qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
#Add an H gate to the qubit
qc.h(0)
#Add an CNOT gate where, control = first,
target = second #qubit
qc.cx(0,1)
#Measure all qubits and send results to cl
assical bits
qc.measure_all()
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
counts, img, histogram = execute_circuit_r
eturns(qc)
2. Then, we will review the result counts by running the following cell:
counts
This prints out the count results:
{'11': 526, '00': 498}
3. To draw the circuit diagram for the CNOT gate, run the following in a cell:
img
The following circuit diagram illustrates the CNOT gate, where the
Control is q0 and the Target is q1:

Figure 6.34: Circuit representation using a CNOT gate
4. To view the histogram results with the counts after executing the previous
circuit, enter the following into a cell:
histogram
The following illustrates the results including an H gate. The following
graph shows the probabilities of the results being either 00 or 11:

Figure 6.35: Histogram representation of CNOT results from circuit, where the y axis represents the quasiprobabilities of the result.
The results from the previous circuit illustrate how the CNOT gates can be used
to entangle two qubits, where one qubit can control the operation of another
qubit, in this case, applying a NOT gate to the target qubit.
In the following section, I will clarify what the entanglement of multiple qubits
means. There are other Control gates that implement other operations, such as
Control-Y (CY), Control-Z (CZ), Control-H (CH), and more. These gates all
share the same characteristics as the CNOT (CX, Control-X) gate in that they
have a Source and Target. The main difference, as you can imagine, is the
operation that the Target would follow. For the CNOT gate, the Target would
operate with an X gate, and naturally, a Control-Y gate would operate a Y gate
on the Target qubit. Try out a few for yourself and see how the results differ.
Notice that the operations will be the same as if you run the single gate to the
Target gate.
The last multi-qubit gate we will focus on, which is also used in a variety of

quantum algorithms, is the Toffoli gate.
Toffoli multi-qubit gate
The Toffoli gate is named after Tommaso Toffoli, an Italian-American professor
in computer and electrical engineering at Boston University. This gate is very
similar to the multi-qubit Control gates mentioned earlier, only this gate has
multiple Controls and a single Target, which in this case is a NOT gate. To
simplify the description of multi-control gates, they are written out in the
following format: CCX. This is to indicate it is a dual-controlled Control-Not
gate, and a CCCX is a triple-controlled Control-Not gate.
The general matrix representation of a Toffoli gate is an 8 x 8 matrix because of
the tensor product of three qubits, as illustrated in the following matrix. Notice
that the first three diagonal 2 x 2 matrix blocks are the Identity matrix and the
last 2 x 2 matrix (bottom right) is a NOT gate representation that flips the qubit.
Note that the matrix for the Toffoli gate in Qiskit is slightly different as it
increases the matrix size by 2n, where n is the number of qubits onto which the
gate is applied. In this case, we have 23 since we have a three-qubit gate:
Let’s run this gate to see the results of it on our quantum circuit:
1. We’ll begin by creating a three-qubit quantum circuit and applying a CCX
(Toffoli) gate, where the first two qubits are the control qubits, and the third
qubit is the target qubit:

#Toffoli (CCX)-gate
#Create a three-qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
#Enable the Control qubits, first two qubi
ts, of the Toffoli gate
qc.x(range(2))
#Add the Toffoli gate (CCX)
qc.ccx(0,1,2)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)
The result of executing this circuit will be no surprise, and consists of 8
possible states since we are running everything on a three-qubit circuit,
which means 23 basis states, where the last state, 111, is the only one set:
[0.+0.00000000e+00j 0.+0.00000000e+00j 0.+0.0
0000000e+00j
0.+0.00000000e+00j 0.+0.00000000e+00j 0.+0.0
0000000e+00j
0.+0.00000000e+00j 1.-3.05311332e-16j]
2. Let’s visualize the Bloch sphere in a new cell:
bloch_sphere

Figure 6.36: Bloch sphere representation from the Toffoli (CCX) gate circuit results
3. And now let’s see our results on the QSphere with the qsphere
command:
Figure 6.37: Qsphere representation from the Toffoli (CCX) gate circuit results
As we can see from the above results, the final state is , as expected,
since the qubits all start in the state, but as the control qubits are
each set to , this sets the target qubit, a NOT gate, to enable and,

therefore, change the state of the target qubit q2 to the state, therefore
rendering the results .
The circuit diagram for the Toffoli gate is as follows:
Figure 6.38: Circuit representation of a Toffoli (CCX) gate
4. Let’s see how the base gates are used to create this three-qubit gate. In a
new cell, run the decompose function of the quantum circuit:
qc_decomposed = qc.decompose()
qc_decomposed.draw(output="mpl")
This will result in the following illustration of all the gates needed to
create a single Toffoli gate. Note that this may be different as this was how
it was displayed at the time of writing:
Figure 6.39: Gates necessary to create a Toffoli (CCX) gate
This looks very complicated. You can see that the use of the various single-qubit
and multi-qubit gates used to represent this one gate are quite complex. In this

example, you can see the use of H, CNOT, and gates. There are other multiqubit gates that leverage single and two-qubit gates in order to operate. The
Toffoli gate allows us to operate on multiple qubits, which we shall see later on
when we start to delve into quantum algorithms.
Let’s look at a gate we would use to swap information between one qubit and
another.
Swap gate
The swap gate is used to swap two qubit values. The matrix representation of
the swap gate is defined as follows:
Let’s create a circuit and implement this by swapping two qubits:
1. We will set the first qubit to the state and the second qubit to the
state. Then, we will invoke a swap between the two using the swap gate
and verify the results of each qubit:
#Swap-gate
from math import pi
#Create a two-qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
#Qubit 0 is initialized to |0> state
#Prepare qubit 1 to the |1> state
qc.x(1)
#Now swap gates
qc.swap(0,1)
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r

esults
result, img, qsphere, bloch_sphere = execu
te_circuit_sv(qc)
By viewing the resulting diagram of the circuit (img) you will see a
circuit diagram of the swap gate as shown here, just after the X gate we
included for comparison:
Figure 6.40: Circuit diagram of an X gate followed by a Swap gate
2. Before viewing the Bloch sphere and QSphere result for each qubit, let’s
take a moment to review what we expect to see. Our two qubits are first
initialized to the state, and we then applied an X gate to the second qubit
(q1) to change its state to . Finally, we added a Swap gate to swap the
value of q0 and q1, which would result in and . Let’s see
the results of both the Bloch sphere and QSphere:
Figure 6.41: Bloch sphere representation of a Swap gate

3. Here, the results you see swap the value of one qubit with the other, which
ends up with qubit 0 with the value we set or qubit 1, and vice versa. Let’s
now look at the QSphere results:
Figure 6.42: QSphere representation after applying the Swap gate
Excellent! The results, as we can see in the previous diagram, show that
the state vectors for both qubits are set as expected, with and
.
This is a good opportunity to describe how the order of the qubit
results is displayed in the Bra-Ket notation. Note from the values
in the QSphere in the previous figure that the qubit at position 0
(the right-most value) is set to one and the qubit at position 1 is
set to zero. This is the Bra-Ket qubit order. As more qubits are
added, they are therefore appended to the left of the previous

qubits, for example,
In this section, we have learned about multi-qubit gates, namely, CNOT and
Toffoli gates. We also learned about an extra gate, that is, the Swap gate.
Now that we are familiar with single-qubit and multi-qubit gates, let’s review the
non-reversible measurement operators.
Understanding the
measurement operator
A non-reversible operator is an operator that is applied on a qubit(s), and if
applying the same operator again on the same qubits, then the results will not
return the qubits to the same state that they had prior to applying the operator.
This section will cover the non-reversible operators, specifically the
measurement operator, and the reasons why they are just as important as the
other operators discussed previously.
Measurement is an operator that instructs the quantum system to measure the
quantum state of the system. Before we dive into how we include the
measurement instruction in our quantum circuits, let’s first define what is meant
by measuring the quantum state of the system.
Note that measurement outcomes are in general probabilistic.
What we lose in information is the complex amplitude of each
computational basis state, into which we can encode information.
At best, we can rerun and measure the circuit multiple times to at
least get statistics.
We know from quantum mechanics that the information about a quantum system

is impossible to access, specifically the measurement of the qubit’s complex
amplitudes. For example, let’s say that we have a qubit in a superposition state
, where the complex amplitudes sum to 1:
A measurement of the preceding cannot provide the complex amplitude
information in . What the measurement of a qubit returns is the basis with a
probability of the state in the standard basis.
We viewed an example of this earlier when describing the Hadamard gate. When
we set the qubit in a complex linear combination of a| and b| , where a and b
are the complex amplitudes of the basis states, the measurement result was based
on the probability of measuring and of measuring | , which for a
Hadamard gate results in 50%, or .
An important thing to note about measuring the state of a system is that once you
measure it, the quantum information of the system is lost. What this means is
that by measuring the qubit(s), the state will collapse into one of the two basis
states, or , based on the amplitude of the components, and , of the
quantum state. After the measurement, you no longer have the information
contained in a and b to do anything else.
If you were to try to measure the same qubit that you just measured, the result
will be the same as the first measurement but will not set the qubit back to the
quantum state in which it was prior to the measurement. Therefore, measurement
is a non-reversible operator.
Once the measurement is completed, the result is then sent over to the classical
bit, which will return the information back to the classical system. Now that we
understand how the measurement works and what the results of the

measurements are, let’s run some code to see it at work!
In this example, we will create a Bell state circuit (we covered these in detail in
Chapter 4, Understanding Basic Quantum Computing Principles), which
contains a Hadamard followed by a CNOT gate:
1. First, we will add the measurement function, measure_all(), at the
end of the circuit, which will automatically map the results of measuring
the qubits to their respective classical bits. We will also add Hadamard and
CNOT gates:
#CNOT-gate
#Create a two-qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
#Add an H gate to the qubit
qc.h(0)
#Add a CNOT gate where, control = first, t
arget = second
#qubit
qc.cx(0,1)
#Measure qubits and map to classical bits
qc.measure_all()
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, histogram = execute_circuit_r
eturns(qc)
2. Let’s now view our results by entering the following in a new cell:
Result
Our results are as follows:

{'11': 448, '00': 512}
3. Our helper function also included the histogram plot, which helps
visualize the preceding results. To view the histogram, enter the following
into the next cell:
histogram
The output is the following histogram plot:
Figure 6.43: Histogram chart of measured results
4. Now let’s see what the circuit looks like with the measurement operators
added. Run the following in another cell:
img

At the end of the circuit illustrated in the following diagram, you will see
that the measurement operators were added to all qubits. You’ll see that
the labels for the classical bits are titled measure, and the qubits are
mapped to their respective bits labeled by the index numbers where the
measurement terminates onto the classical bit:
Figure 6.44: Measurement operators added to a quantum circuit
The barrier is added there just for convenience to visualize where the
circuit operations end and where the measurement will commence.
5. The measure_all() function is a nice and convenient way to apply
measurement operators to your quantum circuit. You can also apply a
measurement operator to each qubit separately and at separate times, or
you can arrange the mapping using a list if you wish to change the
assignment of a qubit to a classical bit. Let’s rewrite our function again,
only this time we’ll add the measurement operators individually for the first
circuit (qc1) and then do the same with the second circuit (qc2) using a
list. This way you can see the various ways in which you can apply
measurement operators, either to all at once, or just to measure certain
qubits:
#Measurement operator
#Create two separate two-qubit,
#and two classical bit circuits
qc1 = QuantumCircuit(2,2)

qc2 = QuantumCircuit(2,2)
#In the first circuit (qc1), measure qubit
s individually
qc1.measure(0,0)
qc1.measure(1,1)
#In the second circuit (qc2) measure using
a list
qc2.measure([0,1],[0,1])
#Execute the circuit and capture all the r
esults
result, img, histogram = execute_circuit_r
eturns(qc1)
result2, img2, histogram2 = execute_circui
t_returns(qc2)
After executing the code, display the two images (img and img2) in
separate cells and notice that both circuits appear the same with respect to
the measurement operators.
In this section, you learned about non-reversible operators. We also created a
simple two-qubit circuit using a measurement operator.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned all the various ways you can operate on both single
and multiple qubits. The operations provide various vector states that each qubit
can rotate into. You also learned how to visualize the gates on a circuit and
learned to decompose them down to universal gates so you can realize the
information that is passed onto the quantum system.
You have now understood how these gates operate on qubits. You now have
skills that will greatly help you understand how gates are used in many quantum

algorithms to position the vectors in the Hilbert space of each qubit to help
resolve various problems.
In the next chapter, we will learn about the Quantum Information Science Kit
(Qiskit), pronounced kiss-kit (depending on who you ask, it may also be
pronounced kwis-kit). Qiskit provides, besides many of the objects and functions
we have been using so far to manipulate qubits, other functionality that helps to
create quantum algorithms, mitigate against noise found in near-term devices,
and produce quantum algorithms for users to leverage without having to learn
about them at the gate level.
Questions
1. For the multi-qubit gates, try flipping the Source and Target. Do you see a
difference when you decompose the circuit?
2. Decompose all the gates for both single and multi-qubit circuits. What do
you notice about how the universal gates are constructed?
3. Implement the Toffoli gate where the target is the center qubit of a threequbit circuit.
4. Decompose the Toffoli gate. How many gates in total are used to construct
it?
5. Apply the Toffoli gate along with a Hadamard gate to a state vector
simulator and compare the results to that from the Sampler primitive. What
differences do you see and why?
6. If you wanted to sort three qubits in the opposite direction, which gates
would you use and in which order?
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other

readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

7
Programming with Qiskit
Qiskit has various libraries that link between the core hardware of a quantum
system and the tools necessary to create quantum circuits, both transcend upward
through the code stack. It is, therefore, the foundation used to create quantum
circuits, as well as generating and scheduling pulses from the circuits onto the
hardware devices. Other features, such as optimizers and transpilers, are used to
ensure the circuits are optimal to reduce decoherence and improve performance.
In this chapter, we will explore all the key features available in Qiskit to help
you create your own circuits, optimizers, and pulse schedules.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Understanding quantum circuits
Generating pulse schedules on hardware
Understanding the Job component
Qiskit has so many features and enhancements that it would take an entire book
to write about them all. To cover as many of them as possible, we will create a
quantum circuit and walk you through the various features. After reading this
chapter, you will be able to understand how to create quantum circuits from
basic to customized circuits with user-defined labels to help contextualize your
circuit. You’ll also get an understanding of the Job component, which is used to
run your circuit on a quantum system.
We’ll even delve into the hardware to schedule a pulse operation on a qubit to
better understand how the circuit is translated from digital to analog signals to

perform an operation on a qubit(s), followed by reading the information from the
qubit and converting the signal back from analog to digital.
Sound exciting? Great! Let’s get to it!
Technical requirements
In this chapter, it is expected that you are familiar with the basics of quantum
circuits described in previous chapters, such as creating and executing quantum
circuits, visualizing circuit diagrams, and knowledge of qubit logic gates.
Here is the source code used throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
Customizing and optimizing
quantum circuits
In previous chapters, you had some exposure to quantum circuit operations to
understand some of the basic quantum components. These basic operations
included creating a quantum circuit, applying quantum gates to the circuit, and
executing the circuit on a simulator.
We will now take a deeper look into quantum circuits to better understand what
properties and functionalities are available to us to not just execute these circuits
on a real device but to do so as optimally as possible. In this section, we will
learn how to extract circuit properties, such as circuit depth, width, and size, and
obtain the number of actual operators. Let’s first start by reviewing the various
forms of creating a quantum circuit.
Components of a quantum circuit

Qiskit provides various ways to create a quantum circuit, each depending on
how much information you need throughout your circuit. Up to this point, we
have been creating circuits using a single constructor that automatically creates
the circuit registers needed. In this form, the arguments indicate the number of
qubits and bits of both the quantum and classical registers, respectively:
# Load helper file
%run helper_file_1.0.ipynb
qc = QuantumCircuit(2,2)
In this section, we will describe other ways to create a circuit and discuss the
advantage of using one form or the other.
Another way to construct a QuantumCircuit class is to create the quantum
and classical registers independently of the quantum circuit constructor. Here,
we will first create the quantum and classical registers, each with two qubits and
two bits, respectively, and then draw the circuit. The constructor allows us to
customize the label of our registers, which we were not able to do in the previous
form:
# Import registers
from qiskit import QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegi
ster
qc = QuantumCircuit(qr,cr)
qc.draw(output='mpl')
From the preceding code, note that the second argument: that is, the name
attribute: of the register constructors allows us to add a label to each register, as

in the following screenshot:
Figure 7.1: Customized quantum and classical register labels
Customizing the labels of our registers simplifies reading our circuits,
particularly as the circuits become more complex when having multiple registers
performing different processes. You may want to have one register created with a
fixed number of qubits and another dynamic register where defining the number
of qubits would vary based on some preprocessed step. You’ll see the value of
this when we create composites later in this chapter.
Of course, you can also combine creating the registers and the circuit constructor
all in one line if needed:
lassicalRegister(2, 'my_CR'))
Let’s assume now that you have two quantum circuits and you want to
concatenate them together. The following example will illustrate how to
concatenate two circuits into one without having to explicitly recreate one based
on the two existing quantum circuits:
1. In the following code, we will create the first circuit and include labels on
both the quantum and classical registers so that we can monitor that they
are, in fact, combined:

#Create the quantum and classical register
s, each with
#labels
qr1 = QuantumRegister(2, name='qr1')
cr1 = ClassicalRegister(2, name='cr1')
#Create the quantum circuit using the regi
sters
#Draw the circuit
qc1.draw(output='mpl')
The following screenshot shows what should be displayed after running
the previous code:
Figure 7.2: The first of the two quantum circuits we will join
2. Next, we will create a second circuit, which is very similar to the first one,
only we will update the labels to identify it as the second:
#Create two Quantum and Classical registers
qr2 = QuantumRegister(2, name='qr2')
cr2 = ClassicalRegister(2, name='cr2')
#Create a second circuit using the registe
rs created
#above

#Draw the second quantum circuit
qc2.draw(output='mpl')
The results of the code should be no surprise: that it is the same as the first
one only with the labels updated as expected:
Figure 7.3: The second of the two quantum circuits we will join
3. Now, let’s finish up by combining one circuit with the other, which is to say
we will widen the circuit from 2 to 4 qubits. To do this, we will use the
add_register function, which combines the quantum and classical
registers into a single circuit. Here, we will combine circuits qc2 and qc1
into a new circuit titled qc_combined, and then draw the results:
#Concatenate the two previous circuits to
create a new #circuit
#Create an empty quantum circuit
qc_combined = QuantumCircuit()
#Add the two previous quantum and classica
l
#registers to the empty quantum circuit
2)
#Draw the concatenated circuit
qc_combined.draw(output='mpl')

As you can see in the following screenshot, the results are now a
combination of the two previous quantum circuits into a new circuit, by
combining the registers:
Figure 7.4: Concatenation of two quantum circuits
We originally created two individual quantum circuits, each with two quantum
registers and two classical registers. We then concatenated them to create a
quantum circuit with four quantum and classical circuits. The order of the
quantum circuits is based on the order in which they were concatenated. As an
extra exercise, repeat the previous concatenation code and switch the order to
confirm or create more quantum circuits and add more circuits together.
One last circuit creation object I would like to share is the random circuit
generator, which, as the name suggests, will generate a random circuit for you.
Having the ability to create a random circuit could help you to create test circuits
or examples given a set of parameters, such as circuit width and depth. As the
following code block indicates, the random_circuit object requires two

parameters. They are the number of qubits you want the random circuit to
contain and the depth of the circuit, respectively: where depth indicates the
number of standard gates, selected from the Qiskit circuit extensions listed in the
API documentation, to add randomly per qubit. You can also indicate whether
you want the circuit to include measurement operators:
#Import the random_circuit class
from qiskit.circuit.random import random_circuit
#Construct the random circuit with the number of
qubits = 3
#with a depth = 2, and include the measurement op
erator for
#each qubit
qc = random_circuit(3, 2, measure=True)
#Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The results from the random circuit will vary, of course, each time you execute
it, as it should. What will not vary are the parameter options, particularly the
number of qubits and the depth count. In this case, your results should have a
circuit that contains three qubits and a depth of two operators. The following
random circuit is the result of running the preceding code. Note that the
measurement operator is not included in the depth count:

Figure 7.5: Random circuit generated with number of qubits = 3 and depth = 2
Now that you are familiar with the various ways to generate quantum circuits,
we will continue and see what properties we can extract from the circuits
created. These properties could be used to analyze the generated circuit and
ensure it is optimized by leveraging some optimization features available to us in
Qiskit.
Obtaining circuit properties and
analysis
Constructing circuits could get very complex once you start building them out,
particularly if you create composites of gates and combine them to form larger
gates. You’re going to want to get some information about your circuit along the
way should you need to analyze your results.
The good thing for us is that Qiskit has taken care of some of this by making a
lot of these properties available to us. Let’s start with some basic properties.
Let’s say we want to know how many qubits we have in our circuit. As we
learned in the previous section, we know that we can concatenate two or more
circuits together. As we add more circuits together, it becomes difficult, or
tedious, to determine the number of qubits and gates that our concatenated

circuit will have. It’s here that the width, depth, and operator count functions
come in handy.
In the following code, we will create two two-qubit random circuits, each with
different gate counts. We will then append one circuit to another and use our
circuit property functions to help us get the total width, depth, and operator
count. All circuits that we append will need to have the same number of qubits
using this method:
#Import the random circuit class
from qiskit.circuit.random import random_circuit
#Create two random circuits, each with 2 qubit re
gisters and
#random gate operator counts.
qc1 = random_circuit(2,2)
qc2 = random_circuit(2,4)
#Concatenate the two random circuits into one
qc = qc1.compose(qc2, [0,1])
#Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The result should be a two-qubit circuit with a random set of gate operators with
a total depth of 6. We know this because we created them and can see the values
from the random_circuit constructor:
Figure 7.6: Randomly generated two-qubit circuits with a depth of 6
Now, let’s use our circuit property functions to get the width, depth, size, and

operator count of our circuit. To simplify this, we will create a helper function
that will print out the circuit properties of the quantum circuit we will pass in as
an argument:
#Define function to print circuit properties:
def print_circuit_props(qc):
width = qc.width()
depth = qc.depth()
num_operators = qc.count_ops()
circuit_size = qc.size()
print('Width = ', width)
print('Depth = ', depth)
print('Circuit size = ', circuit_size)
print('Number of operators = ', num_operators
)
Now, we can run our circuit through our helper function, which will print out all
the properties we need:
#Pass our quantum circuit to print out the circui
t properties
print_circuit_props(qc)
Our results should have the same value for Width and Depth. However, since
we are using random circuits, our circuit size and the number of operators will
be different as they are based on the randomly chosen gates. However, by
observing the circuit, you will see that the result values of size() and
count_ops() are the same. The difference between the two is that the circuit
size returns the total number of gates in the circuit, while the operator count lists
the name of each gate type and the total number of each gate type in the circuit:

Width = 2
Depth = 6
Circuit size = 7
Number of operators = OrderedDict([('cu3', 2), (
, 1)])
Now, let’s try adding some classic registers, measurements, and barriers to see
what we get back. We can use a shortcut to include measurement operators by
using measure_all(), which will append a barrier, a measurement for each
qubit, and the classical registers to match the number of qubits in the quantum
register of our circuit:
#Use measure_all() to automatically add the barri
er,
#measurement, and classical register to our exist
ing circuit.
qc.measure_all()
#Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The result now includes the classical components needed to measure and read
out our qubits. These include the two-bit classical registers labeled as
measure, a barrier separating the quantum gates from the measurement
operators, and the measurement operators, as illustrated in the following
screenshot:

Figure 7.7: Random circuit with classical components added
Let’s now print our circuit property functions to see an updated count:
#Print out the circuit properties
print_circuit_props(qc)
The results show what we generally would expect. The W idth count increased
by 2, due to the addition of the two-bit classical register. The Depth count
increased by 1 due to the addition of the barrier. Note that the measurement
operator is not included in the size or operator count, as follows:
Width = 4
Depth = 7
Circuit size = 9
Number of operators = OrderedDict([('cu3', 2), (
'measure', 2), ('z', 1), ('tdg', 1), ('crz', 1),
('cz', 1), ('ch', 1), ('barrier', 1)])
Before moving on to the next section, let’s look at an interesting caveat to our
circuit property functions. Most gates are created from basis gates that are
specific to the quantum computers used. For most quantum systems, there are a
set of basis gates used to create other gates.
However, some gates, such as the Toffoli and Swap gates, not only require more
than a single qubit but are also composed of several basis gates. Let’s look at the

Toffoli gate as an example:
1. We will create a quantum circuit with 3 qubits and add only a Toffoli gate to
it, as shown here:
qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
qc.ccx(0,1,2)
qc.draw(output='mpl')
Here, we see the Toffoli gate as expected, with the 0 and 1 source qubits
entangled, with qubit 2 as the target:
Figure 7.8: The Toffoli gate on a quantum circuit
2. We print out our circuit properties of the quantum circuit with the Toffoli
gate:
#Print out the circuit properties
print_circuit_props(qc)
As we can see, the results are not surprising in that the values are not
surprising either: a three-qubit gate with a width of 3 and a depth of 1:
Width = 3
Depth = 1
Circuit size = 1

Number of operators = OrderedDict([('ccx', 1)
])
3. Now, let’s print our circuit property, only this time, let’s decompose our
quantum circuit to see the results. As you will recall, when we invoke the
decompose() function on our quantum circuit, we are requesting the
circuit to be decomposed down to its basis gates used to create the gates in
our circuit. In this case, we are referring to the basis gates that are used to
create a Toffoli gate:
#Print out the circuit properties
print_circuit_props(qc.decompose())
Notice the difference? Quite surprising indeed! By observing the results,
we see that the Toffoli gate requires 15 operators, which are made up of
various gates, such as T, , H, and CNOT:
Width = 3
Depth = 11
Circuit size = 15
Number of operators = OrderedDict([('cx', 6),
('t', 4), ('tdg', 3), ('h', 2)])
The reason why I wanted to mention this was to make you aware that
some of the gates used are not basis gates but are rather composites of
basis gates used to generate the functionality of the desired gate. This is
good to know when analyzing your circuit with respect to qubit noise or
decoherence.
Try the same exercise, only this time try creating a two-qubit circuit with a Swap

gate and see what results you get back.
Now that you are familiar with the various forms of creating quantum circuits,
let’s look at how we can reuse these circuits in a modular way that makes it easy
to combine and comprehend them.
Customizing and parameterizing
circuit libraries
There are times when you are going to want to reuse a circuit on multiple
occasions. To simplify this, you can create a composite of operators and reuse
them throughout your circuit. This not only simplifies creating the circuit from
modules but also makes it very easy for others to understand what your circuit is
doing in those composites. Qiskit creates these compositions based on the
instruction sets or quantum circuits.
In the following steps, we are going to create a composite gate that is made up of
multiple qubits and gates:
1. First, we create a two-qubit quantum circuit, give it a name, and convert it
into a generic quantum instruction:
#Create a custom two-qubit composite gate
#Create the quantum register
qr = QuantumRegister(2, name='qr_c')
#Generate quantum circuit which will make
up the
#composite gate
comp_qc = QuantumCircuit(qr, name='My-comp
osite')
#Add any gates you wish to your composite
gate
comp_qc.h(0)

comp_qc.cx(0, 1)
#Create the composite instructions by conv
erting
#the QuantumCircuit to a list of Instructi
ons
composite_inst = comp_qc.to_instruction()
#Draw the circuit which will represent the
composite gate
comp_qc.draw(output='mpl')
The preceding code will create the following two-qubit circuit, which we
will use as our composite gate:
Figure 7.9: The quantum circuit that will represent the composite gate
2. Now, let’s create a quantum circuit that will append the composite gate onto
the circuit we created:
#Create your 2-qubit circuit to generate y
our composite gate
#Create a quantum circuit using the quantu
m register
qc = QuantumCircuit(qr2)
#Add any arbitrary gates that would repres
ent the function
#of the composite gate

qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0,1)
qc.cx(0,2)
#Draw the composite circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The preceding code will create the circuit, which we prepopulated with
some gates before including our composite gate:
Figure 7.10: The quantum circuit that we will append to the composite gate
3. Since our composite gate is made up of two qubits, we will need to indicate
which of the three qubits to append our two-qubit composite gate to. For
this example, we will append it to the first two qubits:
#Append your composite gate to the specifi
ed qubits.
qc.append(composite_inst, [qr2[0], qr2[1]]
)
#Draw the complete circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
As we can see from the results, our composite gate was successfully
appended to the first and second qubits. It also includes the name of the
composite gate, which makes it simple for anyone, including yourself, to

read the circuit and understand what the composite gate is doing within the
circuit:
Figure 7.11: The quantum circuit with a composite gate representation of a predefined circuit
This makes reading your circuit much easier compared to how it would be
if you were to just concatenate the two quantum circuits together.
Of course, this is ideal if you have a circuit that would run as is. However,
there may be times when you wish to perhaps control the amount of
rotation of some of the gates in the composite gate you generated. This is
where the parameterization of composite gates comes in handy. We will
now create another composite gate, only this one will include the ability to
add parameters to your composite gate so that it is more dynamic. This is
commonly referred to as a Parameterized Quantum Circuit (PQC).
4. To parameterize a gate, we will need to create a Parameter class and set
it to a rotation gate; in this example, we will apply the parameter to an RZ
gate:
#Import the Parameter object
from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
#Construct the Parameter set to Theta
param_theta = Parameter('Ө')
#Create a two-qubit quantum circuit and ad

d some gates
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0, 1)
#Include a rotation gate which we wish to
apply
#the Parameter value
qc.rz(param_theta, 0)
qc.rz(param_theta, 1)
#Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
Note that the parameter value is defined as , but is not set as an explicit
value. It just reserves the Parameter value to later include a rotation
value of :
Figure 7.12: Set the parameter of the Rz gate to θ
5. Let’s bind the Parameter value of our gates to and draw the circuit:
import numpy as np
#Bind the parameters with a value, in this
case 2π
qc = qc.assign_parameters(parameters={para
m_theta: 2*np.pi})
#Draw the circuit with the set parameter v
alues

qc.draw(output='mpl')
Note that our rotation gate has its theta value set to as expected:
Figure 7.13: Rotation gates Rz now have the Parameter value θ set to 2π
Our circuit is now ready to run with the bound parameter values. By having this
feature, we can iterate it over a loop and bind multiple values if need be, so that
we can iterate over all of them without having to manually update the bound
values. This greatly optimizes our ability to run and analyze the results of our
circuit for each iteration.
In this section, we learned about various forms and ways to create quantum
circuits using the classes and functions provided in Qiskit to help us analyze our
circuit properties and construction. We also learned how to reuse the created
circuits.
In the next section, we will dig even deeper into manipulating qubits, only this
time not from basis gates, but to directly manipulate the qubits using the
hardware itself!
Generating pulse schedules on
hardware
So far, you have learned how to create quantum circuits, add gates that
manipulate the qubits of the circuit, and execute the circuits. In this section,

we’ll go a little deeper to see how a quantum circuit is converted from digital
instructions to pulse instructions that physically manipulate the qubits using
microwave pulses as instructed by the quantum circuit. Microwave pulses are
what manipulate the qubits on quantum devices. A signal is generated and tuned
to a specific frequency of each qubit so that the signal only affects the qubit that
the pulse is tuned to.
Much of this section will assume that you have some knowledge of signal
processing, particularly that of transmon-like superconducting qubits and
microwave pulses. For reference, this is a fantastic paper that goes into the
details, https://arxiv.org/pdf/1904.06560.pdf, where sections
4.C and 4.D cover a basic overview of how microwave signals are used to
manipulate qubits.
One thing you might be wondering by now is why you should have pulse access
to manipulate the qubits. First, it is good to understand that superconducting
qubits are manipulated by microwave pulses. These pulses send signals down to
each qubit using the qubit’s carrier frequency to ensure that the pulse operation
will affect only the qubit that is tuned to that specific frequency. This way, if you
are a kernel developer, for example, the ability to configure the pulses provides
you with the ability to fine-tune the gate operations yourself rather than the
default pulse shapes that are set up. These fine-tunings could be applied to not
only single-gate operations but also two-qubit operations such as a CNOT gate.
We’ll begin by illustrating how the hardware components are connected to the
various pulse channels. IBM Quantum provides you with access to the machines
in a way that is unique from most other quantum systems available on the cloud.
Qiskit includes a Pulse library that allows you to control the pulses sent to the
hardware that controls the device. Based on the OpenPulse documentation
(https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.03452), it is tailored to provide the
functionality to generate pulse signals used to control the qubits.

To understand how the pulse functionality works, we’ll start by describing the
four main components you will be using:
Instructions
Pulse libraries
Channels
Schedules
In the following sections, we will learn about the preceding components.
Before we proceed to the next section, we will use the following code, which
will import everything we need to create, schedule, and trigger a pulse on a
quantum device directly:
#Import pulse classes
from qiskit.pulse import Waveform, DriveChannel,
Play, Schedule
Now that we have imported the files needed, we will move on to the next
section, about instructions.
Learning about instructions
Pulse programs, or, as described in the Qiskit API documentation, Schedules,
are a set of instructions used to describe the control of the electronic components
of the quantum system. There are various instruction objects included within the
qiskit.pulse library that have capabilities such as modulation of the
frequency and phase of the pulse signal.
pulse, in essence, provides you with the ability to specify the
dynamics of each operation in a quantum circuit, so you can

fine-tune each in a way to minimize as much noise as possible.
pulse has various functionalities to give you access to the
channels that send and receive information to and from each
qubit, and includes libraries of pulses that you can use as a base
and you can then modify each one accordingly.
You can also delay an instruction from triggering, similar to a sleep()
function in most programming languages. Finally, it gives you the ability to
trigger an operation and enable the acquire channel by playing and capturing the
microwave pulse signals, respectively.
Understanding each of the following is dependent on understanding why you
would want to use these functions. For example, setting the frequency is
important as each qubit is tuned to a specific frequency, so any pulse operation
should be sent at the carrier frequency of the specified qubit; otherwise, the
operation will not work, or, worse, it might operate on a qubit that you do not
want to update. Now, let’s describe each instruction and its parameters:
SetFrequency(frequency, channel, name), where
frequency is in Hz, channel indicates which channel the frequency
will be applied to, and name is the name you can set for the instruction.
The default duration of the SetFrequency instruction is 0. This very
simply sets the frequency of the channel so that the pulses applied to the
channel are tuned accordingly. If you do not specify a frequency when
creating a pulse for a specific qubit, the default frequency for the qubit on
the drive channel will be used.
ShiftPhase(phase, channel, name), where phase is the
rotation angle in radians, channel indicates the channel that the
frequency will be applied to, and the name parameter is the name you can
set for the instruction. This instruction shifts the phase of the pulse by

increasing its rotation angle by the provided amount in radians.
Delay(duration, channel, name), where duration is the
length of time in the delay (in the documentation, this is also referred to as
time step, or dt), channel indicates which channel the delay will be
applied to, and name indicates the name that you can set for the
instruction. The Delay instruction is generally used to align pulses with
respect to other pulse instructions. For example, if you wish to send two
pulses and include a time gap between the pulses, you can specify the time
gap by adding a Delay instruction with the desired time gap amount.
Play(pulse, channel, name), where pulse is the pulse
waveform you wish to apply, channel indicates which channel the pulse
will be applied to, and name is the name you can set for the instruction.
The Play instruction will apply the pulse output to the channel specified,
where the pulse output was previously modulated using both the
SetFrequency and SetPhase instructions.
Acquire(duration, channel, mem_slot, reg_slot,
kernel, discriminator, name), where duration is the
number of time steps (dt) to acquire the data information, channel
indicates which channel to acquire the data from, mem_slot is the
classical memory slot in which to store each of the returned results, and
reg_slot is the register slot used to store the classified and readout
results. The kernel parameter is used to integrate the raw data for each
slot, discriminator is used to classify kernelled IQ data into a 0 or 1
result, and name indicates the name you can set for the instruction.
Each instruction includes an operator that will be applied to the specified
channels stated. The operators include pulse modulators, delays, and readouts
from channels. Before we get into discussing channels, let’s create some pulses
using the Qiskit Pulse library.

Understanding pulses and Pulse
libraries
Each microwave pulse is created by an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG),
which specifies the frequency and phase of the pulse signal output. The
instructions we learned about earlier, respectively.
Important Note
Qiskit Pulse provides a nice library of waveforms, which can
simplify creating the pulses we need to operate on a qubit. The
following are the types of available waveforms at the time of
writing this chapter: Constant, Drag, Discrete,
Gaussian, GaussianSquare, and Waveform. Each of
these waveforms has a specific feature, for example, Drag is
used to reduce leakage to the state of the qubit and keeps it
confined to the and states.
Each of the waveforms provided in the Pulse library has a specific feature. We’ll
cover a few of them below, but I would encourage you to read more in the Qiskit
documentation,
https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit/pulse, which
includes a detailed description of each.
Waveform allows you to define your own pulse by providing an array of
complex value samples as an argument. These samples each have a predefined
time step, dt, which is the time period played for each and varies based on the
specified backend. The following code is an example of a sample pulse for a
simple sine waveform of 128 samples:

#Import numpy and generate the sine sample values
import numpy as np
x = np.linspace(0,2*np.pi,64)
data = np.sin(x)
#Generate our Waveform
waveform = Waveform(data, name="sine_64_pulse")
#Draw the generated waveform
waveform.draw()
The following screenshot is the result of creating our sample pulse of a sine
waveform:
Figure 7.14: Sample pulse of a sine waveform
Let’s now try generating one of the waveforms from the Pulse library.
The Pulse library has an array of different waveforms, such as Gaussian,
GaussianSquare, Constant, and Drag (just to name a few). Each has its
own distinct shape that we can leverage to fine-tune any pulse we wish.
Let’s create a GaussianSquare pulse, which is simply a square pulse with
Gaussian edges on both ends, rather than squared-off edges:
#Import the Gaussian Square pulse from Pulse Libr
ary
from qiskit.pulse.library import GaussianSquare

#Create a Gaussian Square pulse
#Args: duration, amp, sigma, width, name
gaussian_square_pulse = GaussianSquare(128, 1, 2,
112, name="gaussian square")
gaussian_square_pulse.draw()
The preceding code will result in the following pulse, where the duration (dt) is
128, the amplification max is at 1, sigma is set to 2, and the width of the pulse
peak is 112 (dt):
Figure 7.15: Gaussian square pulse
As you can see, the parameters available to us allow adjustments to the
waveform in multiple ways. In the Gaussian Square waveform sample, we
were able to adjust the amplitude, width, and its sigma, which therefore provides
us with more control over the creation of the pulse, which could potentially
reduce noise or any other affects that could come from a standard pulse that is
created based on the quantum circuit instructions.
Now that we can create pulses, let’s learn about the channels that we will
transmit these pulses through.
Leveraging channels to transmit
and receive instructions
There are two types of channels in Qiskit Pulse:

The first type is the Pulse channel, which transmits the generated pulses to
the quantum device. These include the Drive channel, Control channel,
and the Measure channel.
The other type of channel is the Acquisition channel. Currently, this type
only includes the Acquire channel, which is the channel that receives
pulses from the quantum device.
All channels only have one parameter, the index, which is used to assign the
channel. The following list describes all the channels:
The Drive channel is the channel used to transmit the pulse signal down to
the qubit to execute the gate operation. When displayed, it has the prefix D.
The Control channel is commonly used on multi-qubit gate operations such
as Control-Not, Control-Phase, and more. They generally provide
auxiliary control over the qubit via the drive channel. When displayed, it
has the prefix U.
The Measure channel transmits a measurement stimulus pulse to the qubit
for a readout from the qubit. When displayed, it has the prefix M.
The Acquire channel is the only channel that is used to receive information
from the device. It is used to collect data from the quantum device. When
displayed, it has the prefix A.
So far, we have learned that pulse programs are instructions that are made up of
waveform pulses that are constructed to perform gate operations on quantum
devices. We also covered the different channels available to transmit and receive
information to and from quantum devices. With this information, we can now
look at how to schedule these instructions to be executed on a real device.
Generating and executing
schedules

Pulse schedules are a set of instructions sent through specified channels to be
executed on a quantum device. The Schedule class can be made up of
instructions or a combination of other schedules. That means you can create a
schedule with one of the instructions we learned about earlier, or you can
combine or append schedules to existing schedules. We will do all this in this
section.
We will use what we have learned so far in this chapter to build a schedule. First,
we will construct a schedule and insert a pulse from the Pulse library into it that
will be triggered at time = 0. Then, we will create another schedule and
insert a different pulse from the Pulse library into it. The second one will be
appended to the first schedule and then shifted, so it is triggered at some time
after the first pulse has completed. We’ll then execute the schedule on a quantum
device and get back its result:
1. Let’s continue using the notebook we have been using so far to create our
first schedule, and name it schedule_1. We’ll also use the Play
instruction to insert the Gaussian square pulse we generated earlier and
assign the schedule to drive channel 0:
#Create the first schedule with our Gaussi
an Square pulse
schedule_1 = Schedule(name='Schedule 1')
schedule_1 = schedule_1.insert(0,
Play(gaussian_square_pulse, DriveC
hannel(0)))
#Draw the schedule
schedule_1.draw()
The result we see is that our Gaussian square pulse was added to the
schedule starting at time = 0, as follows:

Figure 7.16: Schedule 1: Gaussian square pulse
2. Now, let’s continue and create the second schedule, schedule_2, with
the sample pulse we generated earlier:
#Create a second schedule with our sample
pulse
schedule_2 = Schedule(name='Schedule 2')
schedule_2 = schedule_2.insert(0, Play(wav
eform, DriveChannel(0)))
#Draw the schedule
schedule_2.draw()
This results in the following schedule: note the duration of our sample
pulse is 64, whereas the Gaussian square pulse has a duration of 128:
Figure 7.17: Schedule 2: sample (sine waveform) pulse
3. Next, we will create a third schedule, schedule_3, and we will construct
it by inserting both schedule_1 and schedule_2 together with a gap
of 5 time steps (dt) in between the two:

#Let's create a third schedule, where we a
dd the first
#schedule and second schedules and shift t
he second
# to the right by a time of 5 after the fi
rst
schedule_3 = schedule_1.insert(schedule_1.
duration+5, schedule_2)
schedule_3.draw()
The result is a combination of schedule_1 starting at time = 0 and
then we insert schedule_2 starting at 5 time units after the first
schedule. Note the use of the duration variable to ensure that the pulse
does not overlap with the first. Schedule 3, therefore, has a total time of
the two pulses plus the 5 time units in between the two, totaling 197, as
the following figure illustrates:
Figure 7.18: Schedule 3, combining schedules 1 and 2 with a 5 time unit difference in between
4. Of course, there are other ways to combine pulses. If you want to combine
the two schedules without a gap in between, then you can simply use the
append function to combine them:
#We could have also combined the two using
the append operator

#The two schedules are appended immediatel
y after one #another
schedule_3_append = schedule_1.append(sche
dule_2)
schedule_3_append.draw()
The preceding code results in the following output. Note how the total
time units are equal to the total time units of both pulses, without the
additional 5 time units in between the two pulses:
Figure 7.19: Schedule 3, appending two schedules without a time gap in between
Up to this point, we were able to generate a pulse, apply it to an instruction, and
schedule it to run on a specified channel to manipulate the qubit. Generating a
set of pulses allows you to get an understanding of how we can schedule two
separate gate operations to a single qubit sequentially on the specified channel.
In the next section, we’ll see how we can find the status of our quantum circuits
once they have been submitted.
Understanding the Job
component
The last component we will cover is the Job component. The Job component
is basically an instance of the circuit that has been executed on the backend and

contains information from the executed circuit(s), such as results, which
backend, duration, etc. What that means is that once you send the circuit to the
backend to get executed, the backend will generate the Job instance and append
information about the job: information such as status, result, job identifier, and
so on. The following is a list of the available Job functions:
backend() provides the backend that the job is running on.
status() provides the status of the job.
result() provides the job result after execution is completed on the
backend.
cancel() provides the ability to cancel the job.
job_id() provides the alphanumeric job identifier.
We’ll reuse the circuit we created earlier, transpiled_qc, for simplicity so
we can review the Job object and its functions. Let’s start by importing the
job_monitor class and launching the Qiskit job watcher, followed by
running the circuit on a backend and running the job monitor to see the status of
the job in the output:
#Run the simple quantum circuit on local Sampler
from qiskit.primitives import Sampler
sampler = Sampler()
#Let's create a simple circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1,1)
qc.h(0)
qc.measure([0],[0])
#Let's run a circuit with the Sampler primitive
job = sampler.run(qc, shots=1024)
print(job.status())
The preceding code will execute a circuit and the following will display the

details of the Job object; for example, it will indicate whether the job is in a
queue, running, or completed successfully. In this case, the result of the status is
that the job has successfully run:
Job Status: JobStatus.DONE
Other information can also be pulled from the Job object. The Job ID is the
unique identifier of the job that is being run. This ID can be very useful for
various reasons, such as tracking the results, and should you have an issue with a
job running on the backend, you can reference the job ID when speaking to the
support team, which will help the team find the job. The status and results can be
called explicitly using the functions status() and result(), respectively.
The result object provides all the information resulting from running the job
on the backend. Let’s run these functions to review the results of the job we just
ran:
#From the previous output of executed jobs, obtai
n its job id
#and print out information about the Job.
print('Print Job ID: ', job.job_id())
print('Print Job Status: ', job.status())
print('Print Job Result: ', job.result())
The results of each of the functions in the code snippet are as follows:
Print Job ID: dc25c6bd-2ce6-41d5-9caf-f1326f70b9
0d
Print Job Status: JobStatus.DONE
Print Job Result: SamplerResult(quasi_dists=[{0:
0.5107421875, 1: 0.4892578125}], metadata=[{'sho

ts': 1024}])
This is where we can pull specific result information that we can use to visualize
the status of the Job. For example, the following code will extract the counts
from the results and display the counts in a histogram:
job_result = job.result()
quasi_dists = job_result.quasi_dists
# Get result counts
counts = quasi_dists[0].binary_probabilities()
#Print and plot results
print(counts)
plot_distribution(counts)
The results will produce the following histogram which pertains to the results
from each shot as a total of probabilities. (quasi-probabilities) as follows:
{'0': 547, '1': 477}
The histogram will then display as follows:

Figure 7.20: The probability results as a histogram
The job object helps us get details regarding the circuit that we have sent to run
on a quantum system. This information can be used to provide the results back to
our application and visualize the results accordingly. It also provides the status
and other information that we can use to keep track of the job and share details
about the results with others, such as support teams, so they can easily identify
jobs on the backend.
Summary
In this chapter, we covered just some of the many features included in the Qiskit
library. We reviewed creating quantum circuits, as well as executing them on the
simulator and real quantum devices. We also reviewed how to concatenate
circuits so as to enable you to combine and create composite circuits, which
included binding parameters to enable adjustments to various gates.
We covered how the circuits are converted into pulses using Qiskit’s Pulse

library and created schedules, which are programs that send pulse information
via various channels down to the hardware, and looked at how to obtain the
details of the job that was running on the backend.
In the next chapter, we will cover techniques to optimize your quantum circuits
by reviewing the features available via pass managers and optimizers. We’ll also
learn various ways to visualize your quantum circuits and monitor your jobs as
they are executed on the quantum backend systems.
Questions
1. Construct a random quantum circuit with a width of 4 and a depth of 9.
2. Create another random quantum circuit with the same width as the circuit
you created in Question 1 and concatenate it so that it is added before the
random quantum circuit you created.
3. Print the circuit properties of the concatenated quantum circuit from
Question 3 and specify the total number of operators, not including any
measurement operators.
4. Create a circuit with a parameterized RY gate that would rotate by an angle
of .
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

8
Optimizing and Visualizing
Quantum Circuits
In the previous chapter, you learned how to program with Qiskit, using both
circuits and pulse schedules. We’ll continue with the topic of circuits in this
chapter, specifically some new features that optimize and speed up the end-toend process by reducing the overhead between the classical and quantum
systems during heavy computation cycles.
Luckily, Qiskit provides plenty of features to allow us to do this with ease.
Additionally, Qiskit provides a set of classes and features to optimize and
enhance the visualizations of your circuits. Learning about these features will
help optimize your circuit results and allow you to render the circuits in various
styles and representations, such as a directed acyclic graph (DAG).
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
Optimizing circuits using Preset Passmanager
Visualizing and enhancing circuit graphs
After reading this chapter, you will be able to optimize your circuits by using
various visual and programmatic representations of the backend systems and
visualization tools. You’ll also have some insights into the various transpiler
features available that help optimize the transpilation of your circuit for a given
quantum backend system. You’ll have learned about Preset Passmanagers and
how they can be leveraged to generate custom pass managers used to execute the

circuit transformations inside the transpiler at varying optimization levels.
Technical requirements
In this chapter, it is expected that you are familiar with creating and executing
quantum circuits on both a simulator and a quantum computer. Knowledge of
quantum hardware, such as qubits and connectivity between qubits, is also
recommended. You may also need to install Graphviz, LaTeX, and perhaps
other dependencies in your Python development environment if indicated while
running some cells.
Here is the full source code used throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
Optimizing circuits using
Preset Passmanager
We need to ensure that when a quantum circuit is mapped to the quantum system
(transpiled), it is done in the most efficient and effective way. This includes
things such as mapping each qubit to those on the quantum system with the least
amount of noise affected by decoherence or any other noise source that could
introduce errors to your results. To accomplish this, we will learn about the
Preset Passmanager, its usage, and the various features it makes available for
us to create and execute optimal circuits. By optimizing the execution of the
circuit to match the topology of the quantum device, we reduce the noise and its
effect on our results.
In this section, we will learn about transforming a quantum circuit so that it is
best matched to the quantum device. We will also learn how to optimize the
circuit by using the layout optimizer. We will then learn about the backend

configuration and its optimization, along with the pass manager and passes.
Transpiling a quantum circuit
When you create a circuit and run it on a quantum device, there are many things
that occur between the time you send the circuit to be executed on the quantum
device and the time the results are returned. We looked at a few of those steps
when we discussed Qiskit Runtime in Chapter 7, Programming with Qiskit. In
this chapter, we will look at the various features included in Qiskit Runtime,
including those introduced in the latest version of Qiskit 1.0. First, let’s look at a
basic overview of just a few of the processes that occur when transpiling a
circuit.
The following flowchart illustrates the general process in which the circuit is
transpiled so that it can run on the specified backend and be optimized as per the
provided settings:

Figure 8.1: The transpiler process of a circuit from the initial circuit, with passes
We’ll begin by introducing the general steps taken, as shown in the preceding
flowchart, during the execution process:
1. First, the transpiler will unroll the gates in the circuit down to the basis
gates of the specified backend system.
2. Next, it will set the layout of the circuit to the device. One example of a
layout is the trivial layout in which the circuit maps the qubits on your
circuit to the same physical qubits on the quantum device. For example,
qubit 0 on your circuit is mapped to the same qubit index, in this case, qubit
0 on the physical device.
3. Next, it will map the circuit to the hardware topology. This is to ensure that

the logic of your circuit is mapped onto the quantum hardware. For
example, let’s say you have a CNOT that connects the control qubit to the
target qubit. However, if there is not a direct connection between the control
and target qubits, then the transpiler will add some SWAP gates to ensure
that the connection between the two qubits is made by swapping
information between qubits in between the control and target qubits.
4. Finally, the circuit mapping will be optimized to ensure that the circuit
depth is contained to a minimum for the given quantum system. Steps 2 and
3 can be mapped to any combination of qubits on the physical device; as
you can imagine, finding the right combination of qubits to use that reduces
the depth of the circuit is very difficult. Thankfully, the transpiler handles
this for us.
The transpiler is made up of two primary components – that is, the pass and the
pass manager:
A transpiler pass is the component that transforms the circuit from its
current state into a new state. For example, some passes mentioned in the
previous steps are focused on layout selection, routing, optimizations,
circuit analysis, and many others. To see an exhaustive list of available
passes, you can run the following:
# Load helper file
%run helper_file_1.0.ipynb
# Import the transpiler passes object
from qiskit.transpiler import passes
# List out all the passes available
print(dir(passes))
The preceding code will list all the passes available.
For a detailed description of Pass Manager, I

recommend reviewing the API documentation under
qiskit.transpiler.PassManager. To
ensure you have the latest code information, check
the main API documentation page found here:
https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qis
kit/transpiler.
Additional examples can also be found in the guide
here:
https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/guides/
transpile.
The pass manager is the component that is available to you to specify
which passes you wish to use. The pass manager also allows the passes
themselves to communicate with other passes. This is ideal for scenarios
where one pass would provide or obtain information from other passes to
ensure the final circuit adheres to any configuration or optimization
requirements. The pass manager also has some preset passes that it makes
available to simplify the optimization of a circuit.
Generating preset passmanagers
To ease the use of these passes and passmanagers, Qiskit comes with a few prebuilt transpilation pipelines (four at the time of this writing). Each can be found
in the qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers module. These
pre-built preset pass managers are based on the optimization level selected.
These four are currently numbered from 0 to 3. Generating these is also
simplified by using the generate_preset_pass_manager() function.
The preset pass managers are the default pass managers used by the
transpile() function, which constructs a standalone passmanager that
mirrors the transpile() function.

In the following section, we will create a simple circuit and transpile it by using
the preset passmanager generator, which leverages existing preset pass manager
pipelines. We’ll also run the same circuit with two different optimization levels
to see how the resulting circuit differentiates between the two. Finally, we will
create a custom topology to transpile the circuit and compare the results of that
to a circuit created via the preset optimizer. This will illustrate the consequences
of selecting a layout that has not been optimized.
Comparing circuit mappings on different
backend devices
To visualize information on the backend, we learned earlier that we can call the
configuration and properties functions to output all the information. That can be
handy if we want to extract specific data from the results; however, it is quite
difficult to read. This is where the visualization tool comes in very handy. Let’s
first pick two backend systems to compare. In this example, I’ll choose
ibm_brisbane, and ibm_nazca, but you can select whichever quantum
device you have available by running the service.backends() to get a list
of available devices:
# Get a list of all available backend devices
service.backends()
# From the list of backends, select two.
# Get the backend device: ibm_brisbane
backend_brisbane = service.get_backend('ibm_brisb
ane')
# Get the backend device: ibm_nazca
backend_nazca = service.get_backend('ibm_nazca')
Now that we have selected both backend views, let’s look at a visual

representation of the gates and how they are physically connected using the
coupling map. You can see the coupling map by calling the plot_gate_map
visualization function as illustrated in the following code snippet:
# Visualize the coupling directional map between
the qubits
plot_gate_map(backend_brisbane, plot_directed=True
)
This will print out the full connection map of all the qubits for the specified
backend, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 8.2: Cropped view of the ibm_brisbane connection map
In Figure 8.2, with ibm_brisbane (we’ll refer to this backend device as
Brisbane moving forward for simplicity), we can see that not only is it a 127qubit device (cropped so it is easier to read), but also the qubits are connected in
a heavy-hex formation. You can find details about this here:
https://www.ibm.com/quantum/blog/heavy-hex-lattice. Due
to the size of the processor, some of the qubit numbers are not clear, so you may
need to zoom in to view these up close. Also, note that signals can travel in both
directions between each qubit via the connections.

Let’s now visualize the coupling directional map of ibm_nazca, hereafter
referred to as just Nazca. Run the following cell:
# Visualize the coupling directional map between
the qubits
plot_gate_map(backend_nazca, plot_directed=True)
Now, we can see the gate map with the coupling directional mapping between
each qubit, as illustrated here:
Figure 8.3: Qubit plot view with the coupling directional map enabled (ibm_nazca)
You may notice that the coupling maps have some similarities between the two
systems.
Because of the different configurations of the qubits, the layout of the qubits
from the quantum circuit we created might not be defined in the most optimal
way when mapping the qubits on the quantum circuit to the qubits on the
hardware device. Luckily for us, we have transpilation features, which include a
parameter setting that allows us to set the level of optimization of the circuit
layout. The next section will cover the various passes available, and the pass
manager used to manage their usage.

Understanding passes and pass
managers
Passes are generally used to transform circuits so that they are set up to perform
as optimally as desired. There are five general types of passes that transform
circuits:
Layout selection determines how the qubit layout mapping will align with
the selected backend configuration.
Routing maps the placement of SWAP gates onto the circuit based on the
selected swap mapping type, which can be set by providing a coupling map
or backend topology, or by using stochastic methods, where the system will
not assume the input state to the circuit is the ground/zero state to simplify
the circuit.
Basis change offers various ways to decompose, or unroll, the gates down
to the basis gates of the backend or using the circuit’s decomposition rules.
Optimizations optimize the circuits themselves by removing redundant
gates, such as having two of the same reversible gates, such as a Hadamard
gate, back to back, which reverts the qubit to the original state.
Circuit analysis provides circuit information, such as the depth, width,
number of operations, and other details about the circuit.
Additional passes are those that offer some other form of optimization,
such as the various check maps, which check whether the layout of the
CNOT gates is in the direction stated in the coupling maps and rearrange
the directions if needed.
We covered most of the circuit analysis information in Chapter 7, Programming
with Qiskit, to detect the size, width, and number of operations in a circuit. Let’s
look at the first pass type, Layout Selection, to see how we can leverage the
provided layouts and learn the difference between the various optimization
levels.

Learning about the Layout Selection
type
Let’s dig down into one of these types of passes to get a little more detail. Since
we must map the qubits from the circuit to the specified hardware each time, and
we want to execute our circuit on a quantum system, we’ll view the layout pass.
There are various layout passes to choose from when you want to map the qubits
to the physical device. Reasons for this could include wanting your qubits to be
as close as possible to avoid having multiple SWAP gates, or if you are working
on error correction or mitigation, then you may want to map your gates exactly
to the physical qubits to ensure your experiments are consistent. Let’s look at a
few of the basic layout options:
TrivialLayout: This layout assigns the circuit qubits to the physical
device’s qubits in the same order as stated in the original quantum circuit.
So, qubit 0 is mapped directly to qubit 0 on the physical device.
DenseLayout: This layout selects the layout that has the most connected
subset of qubits. If there is a need for many entangled qubits, this layout
will find a subset in which qubits are closely connected to each other so as
to avoid long distances and swaps.
Sabre: This layout leverages a qubit mapping technique that looks at the
reversibility of the quantum circuit where it will try to interpret the global
circuit information to choose the optimal initial layout.
For each of the passes described above, there is a different default setting for the
optimization level of the transpiler. The optimization level is comprised of 4
levels that range from 0 to 3, which specifies whether to not optimize the circuit
at all (level 0) up to full optimization (level 3). The higher the optimization level,
the more optimized the resulting circuit will be; however, it will of course
require a bit more time to run.
In this section, you will learn how to apply and differentiate between each level.

Applying default layouts
Let’s start with the default layouts. We’ll set the various optimization levels in
the transpiler function parameter and apply it to the two backend devices,
Brisbane and Nazca, in the following steps. One thing to keep in mind is
that at the time of writing, all systems available have the same connectivity
between qubits and very similar properties. However, by the time this book is
published, there will be varying systems with varying properties, so even though
the results here might look the same, the results you see (if the systems you are
comparing are different) will vary:
1. We’ll reuse the same four-qubit quantum circuit we created earlier. I’ll
include it again here for your convenience:
# Quantum circuit with a single and multiqubit gates
qc = QuantumCircuit(4)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0,1)
qc.cx(0,2)
qc.cx(0,3)
circuit_drawer(qc)
This will result in our basic circuit where each of the 4 qubits is entangled
via the CX gates to the first qubit, q0.
We’ll start with Brisbane and set the optimization level to 0, which is
to say we will not use any optimization techniques on the circuit. What
this will result in is the qubit on our quantum circuit [0,1,2,3], which
will map to the same qubit index values on the backend device,
Brisbane [0,1,2,…,126].
2. In the following code, we will leverage the qc circuit and use it to test the

various optimization levels. We’ll then print out the transpiled circuit depth
and visualize the layout with the mapped qubits drawn as an overlay over
the backend device. This will illustrate how the different methods are
applied to the backend device:
Note that your results might be different due to the
stochastic parts of the transpiler. So, whatever result
you get is the optimal result at the time of execution.
To ensure you get the same results, you will need to
set the seed_transpiler parameter of the
transpiler() function to a random integer value.
# Generate a preset pass manager for Brisbane
pass_manager = generate_preset_pass_manager(b
ackend=backend_brisbane, optimization_level =
0)
# Transpile the circuit with an optimization
level = 0
qc_brisbane_0 = pass_manager.run(qc)
# Print out the depth of the circuit
print('Depth:', qc_brisbane_0.depth())
# Plot the resulting layout of the quantum ci
rcuit after # Layout
plot_circuit_layout(qc_brisbane_0, backend_br
isbane)
The result, as follows, is as expected, where the qubits are mapped with no
layout optimization at all, and there is the direct mapping of qubits from
the quantum circuit to the hardware device. Note also that the depth is
6464:

Figure 8.4: Transpiled quantum circuit on Brisbane with optimization = 0; direct qubit mapping with no
changes
3. Now, let’s draw the transpiled circuit on Brisbane:
# Draw the transpiled circuit pertaining t
o Brisbane
circuit_drawer(qc_brisbane_0, idle_wires=F
alse, output='mpl')
This will render the transpiled circuit using the basis gates available on
Brisbane; it has been truncated in the following figure to save space.
Figure 8.5: Transpiled circuit of basis gates on Brisbane
Please note that the unused qubits are not visible due to our use of the

idle_wires=False parameter when calling the
circuit_drawer() function. If we remove this parameter, you will
see all qubits, even those that are not in use. Also note that the qubit
mappings are depicted on the left side of the circuit diagram where the
circuit mapping is pointing to the physical device’s qubit. In the previous
figure, we can see that from the circuit, q0 maps to the 0th qubit on the
physical device (as shown by the indicator q0 -> 0).
4. Now, let’s run the same thing on Nazca with the same level of
optimization set to 0. We should see the same results, in that the transpiled
circuit is mapped to the same qubits as our quantum circuit:
# Generate a preset pass manager for Brisb
ane
pass_manager = generate_preset_pass_manage
r(backend=backend_brisbane, optimization_l
evel = 0)
# Transpile the circuit with an optimizati
on level = 0
qc_brisbane_0 = pass_manager.run(qc)
print('Depth:', qc_nazca_0.depth())
plot_circuit_layout(qc_nazca_0, backend_na
zca)
The preceding code will result in the following depth information:
Depth: 4040
The resulting layout mapping, as follows, is also displayed:

Figure 8.6: Transpiled circuit on Nazca
Let’s now look at the transpiled circuit for the Nazca quantum device.
5. We’ll now draw the transpiled circuit using the following code:
# Draw the transpiled circuit pertaining t
o Nazca
circuit_drawer(qc_nazca_0, idle_wires=Fals
e, output='mpl')
The preceding code will display the following circuit:
Figure 8.7: Transpiled circuit on Nazca
One thing to note is the set of multi-qubit gates between q0 and q1 after the
first set of single-qubit gates. These multi-qubit gates can be used to create
a CNOT, SWAP, or ROTX gate, represented by the red block labeled Ecr.

This routing of information between qubits is the result of the routing
pass, which looks for the most optimal connection between qubits. The
following figure shows the decomposed SWAP gate.
Figure 8.8: SWAP gate decomposed
6. Let’s now maximize the optimization level to 3, which performs the
highest optimization of the quantum circuit:
# Generate a preset pass manager for Brisb
ane:
pass_manager = generate_preset_pass_manage
r(backend=backend_brisbane, optimization_l
evel=3)
# Transpile the circuit with the optimizat
ion level = 3
qc_transpiled_brisbane= pass_manager.run(q
c)
# Print the depth of the transpiled circuit
print('Depth:', qc_transpiled_brisbane.dep
th())
# Print the number of operations of the tr
anspiled # circuit
print('Ops count: ', qc_transpiled_brisban
e.count_ops())
# Plot the layout mapping of the transpile
d circuit

plot_circuit_layout(qc_transpiled_brisbane
, backend_brisbane)
The preceding code will print out the total circuit depth and the total
number of operators (Ops count) in the transpiled circuit, along with
the rendering of the transpiled mapping of the qubits onto Brisbane.
Depth: 133
Ops count: OrderedDict([('rz',14), ('sx', 7)
, ('ecr', 3), ('x', 1)])
Here, you’ll notice some gates you might not have seen before; you can
find details about each gate in the circuit library on the Qiskit API
documentation page here: https://docs.quantumcomputing.ibm.com/api/qiskit/circuit_library.
The following diagram shows the rendering of the transpiled mapping of
the qubits, as mentioned earlier:

Figure 8.9: Transpiled circuit with the optimization level set to 3 for Brisbane
As you can see in the preceding diagram, to optimize the quantum circuit,
the qubit order is adjusted from the previous example on Brisbane.
This is due to the optimization_level parameter being set to 3
(highest), which includes mapping to the most optimal qubits. This also
highlights the difference in circuit depth between the two.
7. Let’s now draw the transpiled circuit to review the circuit layout to the
backend:
# Redraw the transpiled circuit at new lev
el
circuit_drawer(qc_transpiled_brisbane, idl
e_wires=False, output='mpl')
The result, as follows, is the same circuit that is now mapped to different
qubits compared to the circuit in Figure 8.6. The difference between this
circuit and the previous one is simply that the transpiler has the maximum
optimization level set, so it will map the qubit operators to the most
optimal qubits. For example, here we see qubit 0 is mapped to qubit 4, as
follows:
Figure 8.10: Transpiled circuit with the optimization level set to 3
8. We’ll set the same optimization level on Nazca to 3 and then transpile the

circuit:
# Generate a preset pass manager for Nazca:
pass_manager = generate_preset_pass_manage
r(backend=backend_nazca, optimization_leve
l=3)
# Transpile the circuit with the optimizat
ion level = 3
qc_transpiled_nazca= pass_manager.run(qc)
# Get the depth and operation count of the
transpiled
# circuit.
print('Depth:', qc_transpiled_nazca.depth(
))
print('Ops count: ', qc_transpiled_nazca.c
ount_ops())
# Print the circuit layout
plot_circuit_layout(qc_transpiled_nazca, b
ackend_nazca)
Here, the total depth is the same, as is the number and type of operators:
Depth: 1919
Ops count: OrderedDict([('rz', 23), ('sx', 13
), ('ecr', 3)])
However, note that the layout is not necessarily linear; it seems T-shaped,
where qubit 0 is connected to 3 qubits, like that of Brisbane:

Figure 8.11: Transpiled circuit with the optimization level set to 3
As you can see, to optimize the circuit depth and reduce noise, the qubit
order is reversed from the previous example run on Nazca.
9. Let’s draw the circuit using the transpiled circuit and see how this mapping
looks compared to the previous circuit mapping:
# Draw the transpiled circuit
circuit_drawer(qc_transpiled_nazca, idle_w
ires=False, output='mpl')
Figure 8.12: Transpiled circuit with the optimization level set to 3

Note the use of qubit 0, now qubit 44 on the hardware, which was mapped
as the qubit on which to base the connections to the other qubits, 0, 3, and
2 in the ECR at the end of the circuit. This is a good example, where the
optimizer mapped the ECR gates to the physical qubits, for example, qubit
45 to qubits 44, 46, and 54 on the device, to optimize based on other
passes used besides the routing pass. One reason for this case could be that
one of the passes considered the coherence time (relaxation time, T1) of
the qubits, which is the time a qubit can maintain its quantum state, where
the qubit with the longest coherence time, at the time the circuit was
transpiled, is qubit 1.
Applying custom layouts
Finally, let’s now create our own custom mapping, or topology, as it is often
referred to:
1. Let’s begin by reviewing the coupling map of an existing device; in this
case, let’s continue using brisbane, which has 127 qubits. We’ll review
the configuration of the backend first:
# Set the ibm_brisbane backend device to o
btain #configuration
backend = service.get_backend('ibm_brisban
e')
backend
The preceding code sets the backend so we can obtain the configuration
and property values of the quantum device.
2. Let’s examine the coupling map for ibm_brisbane by calling the
backend configuration’s coupling_map field:

# View the backend coupling map, displayed
as CNOTs
# (Control-Target)
# Extract the coupling map from the backend
ibm_brisbane_coupling_map = backend.config
uration().coupling_map
# List out the extracted coupling map
ibm_brisbane_coupling_map
The preceding code will result in displaying an array of the coupling
layout of ibm_brisbane. You can verify this by comparing it to the
backend view:
[[1, 0],
[2, 1],
[3, 2],
[4, 3],
…
[125.126]]
3. Next, we will draw the coupling map to see how efficient our circuit is with
the default map:
# Generate a preset pass manager for Brisb
ane
# Set the backend to None so it will force
using the coupling map provided:
pass_manager = generate_preset_pass_manage
r(backend=None,

optimization_level=3,
coupling_map=ibm_brisbane_coupling_map)
# Transpile the circuit with the pass mana
ger
qc_custom = pass_manager.run(qc)
# Draw the resulting custom topology circu
it.
circuit_drawer(qc_custom, idle_wires=False
, output='mpl')
Our circuit, using this topology, is now different from what we saw in
brisbane in Figure 8.10. Here, we see that the same circuit is now
transpiled based on earlier results of the brisbane topology, as follows
(note that this can vary depending on the calibration of the system):
Figure 8.13: The custom circuit using the topology provided by the ibm_brisbane coupling map
4. Up to now, you have extracted the coupling map from existing backend
systems, in this case, ibm_brisbane.
5. Now, let’s create our own custom topology. For simplicity, we will create a
simple linear topology, where the qubits are joined together in a line, as
follows:

# Create our own coupling map (custom topo
logy)
custom_linear_topology = [[0,1],[1,2],[2,3
],[3,4]]
# Generate a preset pass manager
# Set the backend to None so it will force
using the coupling map provided:
pass_manager = generate_preset_pass_manage
r(backend=None,
optimization_level=3,
coupling_map=custom_linear_topology)
# Transpile the circuit with the pass mana
ger
qc_custom = pass_manager.run(qc)
# Draw the resulting custom topology circu
it.
circuit_drawer(qc_custom, idle_wires=False
, output='mpl')
The result from the preceding circuit code is clearly not ideal:
Figure 8.14: Custom linear topology of our circuit
The circuit requires many gates and is quite deep, which increases the risk of

having noisy results. This is a good illustration of the importance of optimizers,
which handle many of these potential issues. It’s no surprise that there is so
much research in identifying better ways to optimize circuits to avoid inefficient
and noisy circuits. However, having the ability to customize your own topology
allows you to create optimal passes that could find unique and effective ways to
optimize the mapping of circuits for testing and experimental purposes.
There are many passes that optimize the circuit (we’ve just covered the layouts
as it is easy to see the differences). If you were to look at the full list of passes,
you would see that if you change the order of the passes, it will change the
results of the circuit when mapped to the physical device. To account for this, we
need to look at the pass manager.
Leveraging the pass manager
The pass manager is what allows the passes to communicate with each other,
schedules which passes should execute first, and allows for custom passes to be
included in the list of passes. This is not as simple as it sounds, as there may be a
significant difference if one pass is used before another or perhaps is unable to
communicate with another pass. We’ll conclude this section with a simple
example of the pass manager, using the following steps to create it:
1. We’ll first append TrivialLayout to PassManager and execute the
circuit:
# Import the PassManager and a few Passes
from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager,
CouplingMap
from qiskit.transpiler.passes import Trivi
alLayout, BasicSwap
pm = PassManager()
# Create a TrivialLayout based on the ibm_

brisbane coupling map
trivial = TrivialLayout(CouplingMap(ibm_br
isbane_coupling_map))
# Append the TrivialLayout to the PassMana
ger
pm.append(trivial)
# Run the PassManager and draw the resulti
ng circuit
tv_qc = pm.run(qc)
circuit_drawer(tv_qc, idle_wires=False, ou
tput='mpl')
The resulting circuit is as follows. Note the specifics of this circuit as we
will be comparing the differences between the layouts of this circuit and
the upcoming circuit (in Figure 8.16):
Figure 8.15: PassManager with the appended TrivialLayout Pass circuit
2. Soon we will explore the functionality of the pass manager using the
routing pass type. We saw a little bit of this when the SWAP gates were
added to connect qubits when they are not directly connected on the
physical device. In the following steps, we will look at passes that optimize
the routing of these SWAP gates.

3. In the following code, we will create a BasicSwap pass, rerun
PassManager on the circuit, and compare the results to the previous
circuit:
# Create a BasicSwap based on the ibm_bris
bane coupling
# map we used earlier
basic_swap = BasicSwap(CouplingMap(ibm_bri
sbane_coupling_map))
#Add the BasicSwap to the PassManager
pm = PassManager(basic_swap)
# Run the PassManager and draw the results
new_qc = pm.run(qc)
circuit_drawer(new_qc, idle_wires=False, o
utput='mpl')
The previous code will create a BasicSwap router and add it to
PassManager upon construction. The executed circuit result is as
follows:
Figure 8.16: PassManager with a BasicSwap router pass circuit

As you can see, the circuit will adapt to each of the passes called from
PassManager – in this case, we added the BasicSwap pass to the
PassManager in the code, which then rendered the circuit mapping in one form,
whereas the TrivialLayout pass rendered in a different form. Doing this
gives you the ability to order how the various passes are run during the
optimization process of the PassManager. Having this ability provides you with
options to test out, should you be researching ways to optimize how your circuit
is mapped and run on a backend device.
Let’s take a moment to digest what we’ve learned so far. When using the
optimization_level option to execute our circuit on a backend, the
PassManager uses the preset passes based on the specific level selected (i.e., 0,
1, 2, or 3). What we managed to do here is customize which passes to use and in
what order, as we did when we added the BasicSwap pass to the previous code.
Having this ability not only provides you with the flexibility to experiment with
various sequences of passes, but you can also create your own pass and compare
it with those existing passes.
Now that you are familiar with pass managers, you can see that they can be very
helpful if you want to use a combination of passes in a way that, when leveraged
one after the other, improves the optimization of the circuit as it is modified
along the way.
In this section, we also learned about the transpiler and how it provides ways to
optimize circuits. We also learned about transforming and optimizing the circuit
using the layout optimizer.
The next section of this chapter is a bit more visual, by rendering the circuits in
different styles and operational flows such as DAGs. These features provide a
way to view the circuits and their functionality in a different form rather than the
default view of the circuits, which is how we have seen them so far.

Visualizing and enhancing
circuit graphs
This section will focus on the various visualizations available in Qiskit. The
graphs we have been using so far were from the default visualization library in
Qiskit. However, we can specify other drawing tools that may be better suited
for your documentation purposes. Say, for example, that you are authoring a
research paper with LaTeX and you want to use the LaTeX content.
By simply adding style parameters from the Qiskit visualization library, you can
then leverage the many features included with the visualization library. We’ll
cover a few of those now to get you started.
Learning about customized visual
circuits
When rendering a circuit, it is often necessary or convenient to have the results
in a format that suits the format of your document. It’s here where the Qiskit
circuit_drawer comes in handy with various features. Let’s begin with a
simple quantum circuit to illustrate the various visual rendering examples:
1. First, let’s create a quantum circuit with various operators to get a good
representation of all the visual components in the various formats:
# Sample quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(4)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0,1)
qc.barrier()
qc.cx(0,2)
qc.cx(0,3)

qc.barrier()
qc.cz(3,0)
qc.h(0)
qc.measure_all()
# Draw the circuit using the default rende
rer
circuit_drawer(qc, output='mpl')
This will render the following circuit drawing, which is just a random
representation of gates. This circuit does not do anything special; it’s just
used to represent various components. As an option, you can use the
random_circuit method to create a random circuit:
Figure 8.17: Circuit rendering using the default library
2. Next, we will render the preceding circuit using latex:
circuit_drawer(qc, output='latex')
This will render the latex version of the circuit:
If you’re running this on your local machine and not on the
platform, you may have some warnings or errors
indicating you need to install some file dependencies, such

as installing pylatexenc. To install this library you will
need to run pip install pylatexenc in a cell first,
and then restart the kernel.
Figure 8.18: Circuit rendering using the latex library
3. If you are planning to post your circuit onto a website, blog, or social media
and would like to include some styles on the image, you can do that as well
by passing in the style contents as a parameter, such as
backgroundcolor, gatetextcolor, and fontsize, just to name
a few:
# Define the style to render the circuit a
nd components
style = {'backgroundcolor': 'lightblue','g
atefacecolor': 'white', 'gatetextcolor'
: 'black', 'fontsize': 9}
# Draw the mpl with the specified style
circuit_drawer(qc, style=style, output='mp
l')
The preceding code results in adjusting the background, gate color
schemes, and font size, as illustrated here:

Figure 8.19: Rendered circuit with the custom style dictionary on matplotlib
To use the style setting, you must use the output matplotlib as this is the
only library that supports the styles.
Details on the available list of styles can be found in the Style
Dict Details section of the Qiskit API documentation
(https://docs.quantumcomputing.ibm.com/api/qiskit/qiskit.visuali
zation.circuit_drawer).
Finally, we will cover a full view of the circuit as a DAG, which will be helpful
to see the circuit as a graph to understand how it flows.
Drawing the directed acyclic
graph of a circuit
As circuits get larger, they will naturally get more complex, and even visualizing
a circuit can get complicated. Imagine a circuit with thousands of qubits and
with a depth of over 1,000. This would be difficult to render and almost
impossible to read. This is where DAGs may help. Let’s create one based on the
circuit that we previously created to illustrate rendering and see how the DAG of
that circuit looks.

In the following code, you will need two components; the first is the circuit-toDAG converter. This will convert the circuit into a DAG. The second component
is the DAG drawer, which will draw out the DAG where the nodes are
represented as quantum registers, classical registers, quantum gates, barriers, and
measurement operators. The edges are directional, which illustrates the flow of
the circuit:
# Import the Circuit to DAG converter
from qiskit.converters import circuit_to_dag
# Import the DAG drawer
from qiskit.visualization import dag_drawer
# Convert the circuit into a DAG
dag = circuit_to_dag(qc)
# Draw the DAG of the circuit
dag_drawer(dag)
This results in the following rendering of the DAG:

Figure 8.20: The DAG rendering of a quantum circuit
The DAG can help illustrate the flow and expected paths of the circuit in order

from top to bottom, where the top level is the first operation, and each operation
is appended as you traverse down the graph. For example, the preceding graph
starts at the top with the qubits in green, then following the graph, we see that
each qubit (represented by the edge labels between the nodes) is operated upon
by a specified operation (represented by the nodes). The graph terminates at the
end in red, where the measurement applied on the qubit is mapped to the
specified classical bit, represented by the parameter values.
In this section, we learned about visualizing circuit graphs with the help of
customized visual circuits. We also learned how to use DAGs to enhance our
circuit graphs and visualize the path of our circuit.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned various ways to optimize your circuits when they are
running on one of the many quantum computers that currently exist. You also
learned about the different passes available to optimize the execution of your
circuit on a specified quantum device. This includes generating a pass manager,
which allows you to customize which passes to leverage based on the selected
optimization level and allows you to choose their order.
We then covered topology and coupling maps, which helped you understand the
importance of knowing the device configurations should you want to create your
own passes. By visualizing the circuits in various formats, you now have the
skills to customize the rendering of images, particularly if you are documenting
your work and would like to keep a certain look and feel. Finally, we covered
alternative rendering of the circuit operation flow by using DAGs.
In the next chapter, we will learn about various noises associated with quantum
systems to understand how we can create noise models that we can use to
simulate and identify ways to mitigate and run more efficient algorithms.

Questions
1. Can you name the two components of the transpiler?
2. Which component allows you to specify the passes to use?
3. What is the default optimization_level value when running the
transpile() function?
4. Name the three Layout Selection Passes.
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

9
Simulating Quantum
Systems and Noise Models
Qiskit is a provider of high-performance backends that can be used to execute
quantum circuits. The various backend simulators available can be used in
unique ways where each can provide different information pertaining to your
circuit. Qiskit also provides a variety of tools that can be leveraged to construct
noise models to simulate various errors that occur on real quantum devices.
These tools are very helpful should you need to compare the difference between
your results from an ideal simulator and that which replicates the effects of noise
from a quantum device.
Both the simulators and tools such as the noise model will help you understand
the reasons for some of the effects on your results, as well as provide insights
should you later want to mitigate those errors yourself.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Understanding the differences between simulators
Generating noise models
Building your own noise model
Executing quantum circuits with custom noise models
In this chapter, we will review the Qiskit simulators and understand the
differences between each of them and what unique functionality each one
provides. We will also delve into the Qiskit noise models that we can generate

based on the specified backend devices to allow us to simulate noise on our ideal
Qiskit simulators.
After reading this chapter, you will be able to reproduce similar noise effects on
the simulator. This will allow you to observe how the noise affects our results,
which would allow us to simulate a real quantum device. Finally, we will cover
how you can create your own noise models and apply them to your circuits.
Technical requirements
In this chapter, it is expected that you are familiar with the basics of quantum
circuits described in previous chapters, such as creating and executing quantum
circuits, obtaining backend properties and configurations, and customizing and
visualizing circuit diagrams, and you should have knowledge of qubit logic gate
operators and states. Also, some familiarity with noise effects such as
decoherence time would be ideal; however, we will cover some of the basics in
this chapter as a refresher. You will need to install the latest version of qiskit-aer
to run the notebooks in this chapter; details can be found in the Qiskit
documentation: https://qiskit.github.io/qiskitaer/getting_started.html.
Here is the full source code used throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
Understanding the differences
between simulators
In this section, you will learn about the various simulator backends that are
included in Qiskit Aer, including the differences between them and their distinct
features. Note that you will need to install qiskit-aer separately as it is not part

of the base Qiskit install.
These features include generating noise models and configuring the simulator
backends that allow you to take advantage of modifying their behavior and
characteristics to suit your needs.
We will learn about the following simulators and their key features:
The Aer simulator, which executes a quantum circuit with multiple shots to
simulate a noisy backend quantum system
The Statevector simulator, which provides the state vector of the quantum
circuit
The Unitary simulator, which provides the unitary matrix of the quantum
circuit being executed
Let’s move on and look at the quantum systems, herein referred to as simply
backends.
Viewing all available backends
If you have read the previous chapters of this book, then you are aware of some
of the simulators we have used. Let’s start off by displaying every simulator
available from the various sources.
We will create a new notebook on IQP and run the autogenerated cell to ensure
you have loaded some base classes and methods and loaded your account
information so we can access IQP:
1. We’ll begin by importing some useful classes and functions including, those
in the helper file:
# Load helper file and import functions:
%run helper_file_1.0.ipynb
from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, transpi

le
from qiskit_aer import AerProvider, AerSim
ulator, QasmSimulator, StatevectorSimulato
r, UnitarySimulator
from qiskit.visualization import *
from qiskit_ibm_runtime import QiskitRunti
meService, Sampler, Estimator, Session, Op
tions
# Load your IBM Quantum account(s)
service = QiskitRuntimeService(channel="ib
m_quantum")
2. Next, we’ll display all the available simulators in the Qiskit Aer library by
using the following code:
# View all available backends
provider = AerProvider()
provider.backends()
This will display a list of all the available simulators:
[AerSimulator('aer_simulator'),
AerSimulator('aer_simulator_statevector'),
AerSimulator('aer_simulator_density_matrix')
,
AerSimulator('aer_simulator_stabilizer'),
AerSimulator('aer_simulator_matrix_product_s
tate'),
AerSimulator('aer_simulator_extended_stabili
zer'),
AerSimulator('aer_simulator_unitary'),
AerSimulator('aer_simulator_superop'),

QasmSimulator('qasm_simulator'),
StatevectorSimulator('statevector_simulator'
),
UnitarySimulator('unitary_simulator')])]
3. The following code will list out the simulators that are part of the
Qiskit-Aer library. These are also available as Python built-in
simulators, should you not want to install Aer and just use Qiskit. For
simplicity and performance considerations, we will be using the Qiskit
simulators throughout this book. However, you can certainly interchange
the Aer simulators with those actual quantum systems listed in service
as needed. But since we want to conserve usage time, let’s stick with the
simulator for these basic circuits and learning concepts.
4. And finally, we can list all the quantum systems available from the Qiskit
Runtime Service:
# View all available IBM Quantum backends
service.backends()
This will not only list the simulator but also list the real quantum devices
available to you based on your account. Those listed will vary based on
available devices and upgrades since this writing:
[<IBMBackend('ibm_brisbane')>,
<IBMBackend('ibm_kyiv')>,
<IBMBackend('ibm_nazca')>,
<IBMBackend('ibm_sherbrooke')>,
<IBMBackend('ibm_kyoto')>,
]

As this chapter is focused on simulators, we will learn about the local simulators
that are installed from the Qiskit library going forward. We’ll start with the Aer
simulators, which we can use to execute small circuits.
Running circuits on the Aer
simulator
The Aer simulator is not only used to execute quantum circuits but is also very
versatile because of its ability to apply various simulation methods and
configuration options.
A few of the available simulation methods are described as follows:
statevector: This is a statevector simulation within the Aer library that
allows ideal circuit measurements at the end of the quantum circuit. In
addition, each shot that executes the circuit can sample random noise from
noise models to provide noisy simulations.
density_matrix: This method provides a density matrix simulation
that like the statevector, samples the quantum circuits with measurements
given at the end of each circuit.
matrix_product_state: This is a tensor-network statevector
simulator that leverages a Matrix Product State as the representation of the
state.
automatic: If no method is set, then this method will select one
automatically based on the number of qubits, the quantum circuit, and the
noise model.
There are many backend options available; below is a subset of the available
backend_options:
device: This sets the simulation device where CPU is set by default.
However, the statevector, unitary, and density_matrix

simulators can also run on systems equipped with an Nvidia Graphical
Processing Unit (GPU). To configure the simulator to a GPU, simply set
the options parameter, device='GPU'.
precision: This sets the floating point to either single or double
precision; the default is double. Setting the precision to single will
halve the required memory of the backend, which could provide some
performance improvement on certain systems.
zero_threshold: This truncates small values to 0 and will truncate
very small values. The default truncation value is set to 1e-10, but this can
be adjusted to suit the needs of the developer.
validation_threshold: This threshold is used to verify if the initial
statevector of the quantum circuit is valid, with the default value set to
1x10-8.
max_parallel_threads: Setting this parameter to (the default value)
0 enables the simulator to run on all available cores.
max_parallel_experiments: The maximum number of qobj
(QASM object), which rep resents a single payload of a Qiskit provider to
run circuits in parallel. The max value cannot exceed the
max_parallel_threads value. If the max is set to 0, it will be set to
the max_parallel_threads value.
max_parallel_threads: This sets the maximum number of CPU
cores for parallelization. The default value is set to 0, which means it will
set it to the maximum number of CPU cores.
max_memory_mb: Setting this parameter to 0 enables the simulators to
maximize the size of system memory to store a state vector; the default
value is set to 0. If more memory is needed, an error will be thrown. As a
reference, a state vector of n-qubits uses 2n complex values of
approximately 16 bytes.

Now that you have knowledge of the simulation methods and backend options,
we’ll create a simple circuit and execute it using Aer’s QasmSimulator class.
For this example, we will create the same circuit example we have been using so
far, consisting of Hadamard and CX gates, which places the quantum circuit in a
superposition and entangles both qubits together:
Here, we are creating a 2-qubit and 2-bit circuit; when using the
measure_all() function, we will need to set the
add_bits parameter to False so that it does not add the
classical bits since we have already added them in the
QuantumCircuit constructor.
# Create a quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0, 1)
qc.measure_all(add_bits=False)
Now, let’s create the Aer simulator using the get_backend() function:
# Instantiate the QASM simulator from the Aer pro
vider
backend_simulator = QasmSimulator()
# Transpile the circuit transpiled_qc = transpile
(qc, backend_simulator)
# Run the circuit using the transpiled circuit
job = backend_simulator.run(transpiled_qc)
# Print out the result counts
result = job.result()
counts = result.get_counts(qc)

print(counts)
This will print out the results from executing the quantum circuit on the Aer
simulator, with the method set to a state vector, obtaining the result counts.
As you can see, this runs the same results as if you ran aer_simulator as
follows:
# Get the Aer simulator and set the backend optio
ns
aer_simulator = AerSimulator(method='statevector'
)
# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, aer_simulator) # Ru
n the circuit with the Aer simulator
job = aer_simulator.run(transpiled_qc)
print(job.result().get_counts(qc))
Both forms execute the circuit in the same manner, with varying values in the
results, of course. Here, you can see the results, which both ran a total, 1024
shots, as this is set by default:
{'00': 501, '11': 523}
We’ll continue by extending the backend options to include other parameters that
we might find useful, such as shots and memory, in the next section.
Adding parameters to the backend
options
We may already be familiar with the shots parameter, which specifies how

many times to execute the circuit on the backend. However, as illustrated in the
previous example, the counts returned are the total values of all the shots, but not
in the order in which each result was returned. There may be situations when you
would like to examine the results of each shot in chronological order.
To examine the measured results that are stored in the individual memory slots,
you will need to set the memory parameter in the backend options. Let’s rerun
the previous circuit; however, this time we will set the memory flag to True
and display the results. We’ll run just 10 shots this time to avoid a very large
output string:
# Run the circuit on the simulator and set the me
mory to True
# Run the transpiled circuit using the backend op
tions created
job = backend_simulator.run(transpiled_qc, shots=
10, memory=True)
result = job.result()
# Pull the memory slots from the results
memory = result.get_memory(transpiled_qc)
# Print the results from the memory slots
print('Memory results: ', memory)
This will output the 10 memory slot entry results from the execution of the
circuit. Notice that the results are varying combinations of 00 and 11, as
expected for the circuit:
Memory results: ['00', '11', '11', '11', '00', '00
', '00', '11', '00', '11']

Having the memory feature built into the Aer simulator gives you the ability to
visualize each result of your circuit count. The next section will illustrate how to
initialize and set up all, or just a subset, of the qubits.
Initializing the qubits on a circuit
As we learned early on, each qubit is initialized to the ground state, or the
state. However, there may be times when we would like to set a different initial
state. Luckily for us, the Aer simulator allows us to initialize the state of the
circuit to some other state, , in lieu of all states.
We will follow the next steps to initialize the qubits:
1. In the previous example, we created a circuit that contained a Hadamard
and Control-Not gate to obtain the entangled state results of or . In
this example, we will initialize our circuit so that the results are the same
without needing to add any gates:
# Construct a 2 qubit quantum circuit
qc_init = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
# Import numpy to simplify some math for us
import numpy as np
# Select the qubits by their index which y
ou wish to initialize
init_qubits = [0, 1]
# Inititialize qubit states
qc_init.initialize([1, 0, 0, 1] / np.sqrt(2
), init_qubits)
# Add measurements and draw the initialize
d circuit
qc_init.measure(range(2), range(2))
qc_init.decompose()

qc_init.draw(output="mpl")
This results in the following circuit diagram:
Figure 9.1: Initialized qubits to an initial state other than the zero state
Notice that the qubits are collectively initialized into the state of
. This circuit now has an initialized state that can be applied to any circuit
should you wish a circuit to begin in a state other than the ground/zero
state. Initializing a state can be needed when using a variational quantum
algorithm that needs to be updated each time it is run to optimize its
results.
2. Now, let’s execute this circuit and observe each result:
# Set the memory to True so we can observe
each result
result = backend_simulator.run(qc_init, sh
ots=10,
memory=True).result()
# Retrieve the individual results from the
memory slots

memory = result.get_memory(qc_init)
# Print the memory slots
print(memory)
This prints out the following results:
['11', '11', '00', '11', '11', '00', '00', '0
0', '11', '00']
As you can observe from the results, we get only the two initialized state
results of either or , as expected.
3. Now, you don’t have to initialize all qubits in a circuit; you can also specify
a group of qubits to initialize, as illustrated in the following code:
# Create a 4 qubit circuit
qc_init2 = QuantumCircuit(4, 4)
# Initialize only the last 3 qubits
initialized_qubits = [1, 2, 3]
# Set the initial state, remember that the
sum of # amplitudes-squared must equal 1
qc_init2.initialize([0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1
] / np.sqrt(4),
initialized_qubits)
# Add a barrier so it is easier to read
qc_init2.barrier(range(4))
# Measure qubits, decompose and draw circu
it
qc_init2.measure(range(4), range(4))
qc_init2.decompose()
qc_init2.draw(output='mpl')

This results in the following circuit, which initializes the state of the q_1
to q_3 qubits, while all the other qubits that are initialized remain in the
ground/zero state:
Figure 9.2: Initialization of the last three qubits
Here, our 3-qubit initialized state is set to
However, since we are executing a 4-qubit circuit, and we have initialized
the last 3 qubits, our results should include the fourth qubit (q0), which
would append a 0 to the least significant bit.
4. Let’s run the experiment and see whether the initial state of the partial
qubits is successful:
# Execute the circuit and print results an
d histogram
result = backend_simulator.run(qc_init2).r
esult()
counts = result.get_counts(qc_init2)
print(counts)
plot_distribution(counts)

As expected, our results are as follows (note that due to the randomness of
the circuit, actual results could vary):
{'0010': 275, '1010': 250, '0110': 255, '1110'
: 244}
We also get the following output graph:
Figure 9.3: Results of initialized quantum circuit
As you can see, the results are exactly as we expected them to be. Notice
that the least significant bit (the bit on the far right) is always set to 0 as it
was not one of the initialized qubits. The other thing to take note of is that
the other bits are exactly as we expected, ,
where the bold indicates the initialized bits, and if you combine them all
together, they will provide the results displayed.

5. Now that we have initialized a circuit, we can apply any gate as needed.
The only difference is that the gates applied to the circuit after initialization
will then be applied to the initialized state of each qubit, rather than the
default initialized state . Let’s test this out by adding a NOT (X) gate to
all the qubits. This should result in all the values being flipped:
# Create a 4-qubit circuit
qc_init_x = QuantumCircuit(4, 4)
# Import numpy
import numpy as np
# Initialize the last 3 qubits, same as be
fore
initialized_qubits = [1, 2, 3]
qc_init_x.initialize([0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0
, 1] /
np.sqrt(4), initialized_qubits)
# Add a barrier so it is easier to read
qc_init_x.barrier(range(4))
# Include an X gate on all qubits
for idx in range(4):
qc_init_x.x(idx)
# Measure and draw the circuit
qc_init_x.measure(range(4), range(4))
# Decompose the circuit down a level
qc_init_x.decompose()
# Draw the completed circuit
qc_init_x.draw(output='mpl')
This results in the following circuit:

Figure 9.4: Initialized quantum circuit with X gates applied to all qubits before measuring
Notice the initialized qubits are as before, only after the X gates on all
qubits that we have added just before measuring. This should result in all
bits flipping from 0 to 1, and vice versa.
6. Let’s execute the circuit and display the results using the following code:
# Execute and get counts
result = backend_simulator.run(qc_init_x).
result()
counts = result.get_counts(qc_init_x)
print(counts)
plot_distribution(counts)
This results exactly as expected; the results are based on the initialized
state, followed by the NOT gates being applied on all qubits:
{'0101': 256, '0001': 268, '1101': 232, '1001'
: 244}

We also get to see the following graph:
Figure 9.5: Results of the initialized circuit with X gate applied to all qubits
The Aer simulator’s ability to be very flexible and configurable means that
creating custom circuits with the ability to initialize qubit states is quite an
advantage. We will see this in more detail in Chapter 12, Understanding
Quantum Algorithms, where we will see how this is applied to variational or
other hybrid quantum algorithms.
Now that we are familiar with the Aer simulator, let’s move on to the statevector
simulator and see what unique features we have available.
Running circuits on the
statevector simulator
The statevector simulator, like the Aer simulator, allows you to initialize and

execute a quantum circuit. There are of course some distinct differences, one of
which is that it returns the state vector of the quantum circuit by executing a
single shot. This allows you to capture a snapshot of the state vector so you can,
in some sense, calculate or observe the expected results on the qubits. Because
the statevector simulator simulates the ideal execution of a quantum circuit and
results in the final quantum state vector of the device at the end of a simulation,
this result can then be used for debugging or educational purposes.
We will also leverage some of the Aer visualization tools to help display the state
information of the qubits and the quantum circuit. We will follow the next steps
to do so:
1. To begin, let’s create a simple 1-qubit circuit and add a Hadamard gate to it
so we have a qubit in a superposition:
# Construct quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
# Place qubit in superposition
qc.h(0)
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The result of this is as follows, where we have a single qubit in a
superposition, that is, a complex linear combination of and :
Figure 9.6: Single qubit circuit with a Hadamard gate
2. Next, we want to see the state vector representation of the circuit. Before
coding it, let’s review the mathematics around it. We know that each basis
state is represented by state vectors, such as the following for the state:

Similarly, the state can be represented by a state vector as follows:
3. The initial state of a qubit is . The Hadamard gate generally applies the
Hadamard matrix to the current state of the qubit, which places the qubit
into a superposition state. Therefore, if a Hadamard gate is applied to a
qubit in the state the operation would be as follows:
Multiplying the matrix by the vector results in the following:
4. Now, let’s execute our circuit using the state vector simulator and output the
state vector values:
# Select the Statevector simulator from th
e Aer provider
simulator = StatevectorSimulator()
# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, simulator)
# Run the transpiled circuit
result = simulator.run(transpiled_qc).resu
lt()
# Get the state vector and display the res

ults
statevector = result.get_statevector(trans
piled_qc)
statevector
From the results, we can obtain the state vector of the quantum circuit by
simply extracting it from the Job object, in this case,
result.get_statevector().
This should result in the following output that correctly matches our
expected results, which include the state vector matrix dimension
information, and where the amplitude values in the results are exactly .
Furthermore, if we square the amplitudes, the results will provide us with
the probability of obtaining a 0 or a 1. The statevector results represent the
expected results when applying a Hadamard to an initial state vector
as we described in step 3:
Statevector([0.70710678+0.j, 0.70710678+0.j],
dims=(2,))
5. Let’s extend this by adding another qubit in superposition:
# Construct quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
# Place both qubits in superposition
qc.h(0)
qc.h(1)
qc.draw()
The result of this circuit is similar to the previous, just with an addition of

an added qubit:
Figure 9.7: Two qubits in superposition
6. Let’s run this circuit using the state vector simulator and print out the
results of our state vector:
# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, simulator)
# Run the circuit using the state vector s
imulator
result = simulator.run(transpiled_qc).resu
lt()
# Extract the state vector of the circuit
from the # results
statevector = result.get_statevector(trans
piled_qc)
# Output the state vector values
statevector
This results in the following output, which represents equal amplitudes for
all 4 possible states, , and :
Statevector([0.5+0.j, 0.5+0.j, 0.5+0.j, 0.5+0
.j], dims=(2,2))

Here, if we square each of the values to obtain the probability
measurements, we will see that each has a 25% probability of being
correct. Recall that all probabilities must add up to 1.
7. Finally, let’s entangle the qubits and see what the state vector results would
be when applying a Hadamard gate to the first qubit:
# Construct quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
# Place the first qubit in superposition
qc.h(0)
# Entangle the two qubits together using a
CNOT gate,
# where the first is the control and the s
econd qubit is
# the target
qc.cx(0, 1)
# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, simulator)
# Run the circuit on the state vector simu
lator
result = simulator.run(transpiled_qc).resu
lt()
# Obtain the state vector of the circuit
statevector = result.get_statevector(trans
piled_qc)
# Output the state vector values
statevector
The state vector results are as expected, with equal amplitude values of
for 00 and 11, and no values for the states 01 and 10:

Statevector([0.70710678+0.j, 0.+0.j, 0.+0.j,
0.70710678+0.j], dims=(2,2))
8. We can also seek the aid of the visualization tools to help illustrate the state
vector results for the circuit we just executed. We will add the
plot_state_city vector function:
# Display state vector
plot_state_city(statevector)
The results are the same values we saw earlier, only here we can see the
amplitudes of both the real (left) and imaginary (right) components. When
we square the amplitudes of our result, we will get a 50% probability for
the 00 and 11 states, which is what we see in the following state vector
plot. A state city plot is a term used to describe a view of a 3D bar graph
(typically two-dimensional). The term is taken as the bar graphs on the 2D
plot look like buildings in a city. In this case, we have two: one to
represent the real values and another to represent the imaginary values of
our state vectors.
Note that in our results, we did not have any value in any of the imaginary
components of our state vector 1.+0.j:

Figure 9.8: State vector plot with real (left) and imaginary (right) components
The state vector plot helps visualize the density matrix of 2-qubits, which
itself has 16 complex qubit amplitudes. The topic of density matrices is
outside the scope of this book but in short, it is generally an alternative to
express all the quantum states such as and , where this is
the same with respect to the expected measurement outcome but allows us
to describe these mathematically using the density matrix.
Details describing the density matrix and how it is used
can be found in the documentation here:
https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit
/qiskit.quantum_info.DensityMatrix.
The state vector plot isn’t the only visualization tool we have available.
Another great tool available is the Qiskit qsphere. This plots the state
vector onto a two-dimensional graph and includes unique visualization
features that allow you to see the probabilistic results and the phase when
squaring the amplitudes of the state vector.
9. Let’s plot the probabilistic results from the same state vector on a qsphere:
# Import the plot_state_qsphere class
from qiskit.visualization import plot_stat
e_qsphere
%matplotlib inline
# Create quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
# Place the qubit in a superposition state
qc.h(0)
# Execute the circuit on the statevector s
imulator

backend = StatevectorSimulator()
# Tanspile and run the circuit on the stat
evector simulator
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, backend)
result = backend.run(transpiled_qc).result
()
# Display the QSphere with results from th
e previous cell
plot_state_qsphere(transpiled_qc)
Let’s review the results and how they are displayed in the qsphere:

Figure 9.9: Qsphere representation of the results after squaring the state vector results
First, notice the vectors point to the north state and south state with
the spheres at the end of each vector having equal diameters. This is to
illustrate that there is an equal probability that the result will either be a 0
or 1, hence they are in superposition, as expected.
Next, the color of each sphere matches the color corresponding to the
phase of the state as described in the phase wheel located at the bottom
right of the qsphere. This indicates that each vector is in phase (0°), which
corresponds to a blue color. The results here match the expected equation

we derived earlier, where we are placing the qubit in a superposition state;
however, we have not applied any phase rotations, which are rotations
around the Z-axis in this case:
Let’s do something interesting by introducing a phase shift. As we saw in
the preceding screenshot, the vector moves from |0⟩ to |+⟩ in phase (0°)
when we apply the Hadamard gate. We’ll now include a Z gate, also
known as a phase gate, which rotates the vector by an angle of around
the z axis. As before, we’ll review the mathematics first to confirm what
we should expect to see. Recall earlier how we described the effects of
applying the Hadamard gate when the state vector originates from |0ñ. The
following applies the Hadamard gate to the |1ñ state:
Multiplying the matrix with the vector results produces the following:
1. We will create a circuit originating from the state and apply the H gate
to it to confirm the preceding vector results:
# Create a quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
# Rotate the state from |0> to |1> by appl
ying an X gate

qc.x(0)
# Place qubit in a superposition from the
|1> state
qc.h(0)
# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, backend)
# Run the circuit
result = backend.run(transpiled_qc).result
()
# Extract the state vector results and plo
t them onto the
# QSphere
plot_state_qsphere(result.get_statevector(
transpiled_qc))
The resulting qsphere now has the same probability as before; however,
since the rotation originated from the state, it is now at the side,
therefore out of phase by , which we can confirm by observing the
following phase color chart (note that the color representations might
change over time. Just compare the color to the color phase wheel for
value to color mapping):

Figure 9.10: A superposition state that is also out of phase by an angle of
2. Now, let’s try the same thing, this time originating from the state:
# Create a quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
# Place qubit in a superposition from the
|0> state
qc.h(0)
# Apply a Z (phase) gate, to rotate it by
# an angle π around the Z axis
qc.z(0)

# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, backend)
# Run the circuit
result = backend.run(transpiled_qc).result
()
# Extract the state vector results and plo
t them onto the
# QSphere
plot_state_qsphere(result.get_statevector(
transpiled_qc))
The results, as we can see, are the same – there is a relative phase
difference of between the two states, and :

Figure 9.11: A state vector in superposition and out of phase by
We can see that the state vector representation illustrates what we see
mathematically, which is the following in this case:
From the preceding equation, the negative value represents the out-of-phase
component. We will see later on how various quantum algorithms leverage this
in order to take advantage of the effects of interference in Chapter 12,
Understanding Quantum Algorithms.
So far, we have seen that we can obtain and visualize the quantum state

information from our quantum circuits using the state vector simulator. This
allows us to determine whether the state of our circuit is what we are expecting,
which helps when we are trying to debug the results of our circuit. We can also
visually inspect our quantum circuits using various graphs to review information
such as the density matrix and the probabilistic results based on the results from
our state vector. Next, we will look at how we can obtain the unitary matrix of
our circuit by leveraging the unitary simulator.
Running circuits on the unitary
simulator
The unitary simulator provides the construction of the unitary matrix, U, of the
circuit. The unitary matrix is the operator representation of your quantum circuit,
which allows you to determine whether the circuit represents an operator you are
either trying to replicate or create. The unitary simulator builds out the unitary
matrix by stepping through the circuit and applying each gate to the initial state
of the circuit. As described in the API documentation
(https://qiskit.github.io/qiskitaer/stubs/qiskit_aer.UnitarySimulator.html), the semantic
validations will verify the constraints of the qobj and backend options, which
are as described as follows:
The number of shots is set to 1, so only a single shot will be run to calculate
the unitary matrix.
The circuit cannot contain any resets or measurements. Since the unitary
simulator’s job is to just calculate the unitary matrix, there is no need to
determine the measurement of the circuit.
No noise models can be applied as it would require working with nonunitaries.
If the circuit goes beyond any of the preceding constraints, it will raise an

AerError.
We will leverage the same circuit we created earlier for the state vector example
to run through our unitary simulator so we can compare and contrast the results:
1. First, let’s validate what we should expect to see mathematically. As we will
be applying a single Hadamard gate, it should be fairly simple to determine
the unitary matrix. Starting from the initial state, we will apply an H gate to
the circuit:
2. Now, we will run our circuit on the unitary simulator, where we will create
a quantum circuit and add a Hadamard gate, then set the simulator to the
unitary simulator provided by Aer. We should expect to see the same result:
# Create a quantum circuit and add a Hadam
ard gate
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
qc.h(0)
# Set the simulator to the UnitarySimulato
r from the Aer
# provider
simulator = UnitarySimulator()
# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, simulator)
# Run the circuit on the unitary simulator
result = simulator.run(transpiled_qc).resu
lt()
# Extract the unitary matrix from the resu
lts

unitary = result.get_unitary(transpiled_qc
)
# Print out the unitary matrix representat
ion of the circuit
print("Unitary of the circuit:\n", unitary
)
Your unitary results should match the results we calculated
mathematically; you can ignore the significantly small numbers in the
imaginary component:
Unitary of the circuit:
[[ 0.70710678+0.00000000e+00j 0.70710678-8.65
956056e-17j]
[ 0.70710678+0.00000000e+00j -0.70710678+8.65
956056e-17j]]
3. Now, let’s create another circuit, only this time, let’s apply a phase shift
after placing our circuit into a superposition. Let’s do this by adding a Z
phase gate after the H gate:
# Create a new circuit, adding an H gate f
ollowed by a Z gate
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)
qc.h(0)
qc.z(0)
# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, simulator)
# Run the circuit on the unitary simulator
result = simulator.run(transpiled_qc).resu
lt()

# Retrieve the unitary matrix from the res
ults
unitary = result.get_unitary(transpiled_qc
)
# Print the unitary matrix representation
of the circuit
print("Unitary of the circuit:\n", unitary
)
qc.draw(output='mpl')
This will produce the following unitary matrix representation of the
quantum circuit we created. Note the difference in the signs:
Unitary of the circuit:
[[ 0.70710678+0.00000000e+00j 0.70710678-8.65
956056e- 17j]
[-0.70710678+0.00000000e+00j 0.70710678-8.659
56056e- 17j]]
This will also give us the following circuit diagram:
Figure 9.12: 2-gate circuit applying an H gate followed by a Z gate
We can confirm this using a bit of linear algebra. One thing to note is that
when we apply gates on a circuit and visualize them, we generally apply
them from left to right, as illustrated in the preceding circuit diagram,
where we see the H gate first, followed by the Z gate.
4. However, when calculating the unitary matrix, we place the unitary
matrices of each gate we add from right to left. This is the order for the

writing convention used to describe the order of applying operations onto
an initial state. For example, in this circuit, we calculated the unitary matrix
in the following order: first applying the H gate, then the Z gate, so from
right to left this results in ZH = U, where U is the unitary matrix solution.
Let’s calculate this matrix now:
As you can see from the preceding equation, we have now confirmed that it is
the same result we received from the unitary simulator for this circuit.
As with the previous simulators, we can also initialize the unitary simulator with
a given unitary matrix. Let’s use the results from the previous example as our
initial unitary matrix:
# Create a quantum circuit
qc_init = QuantumCircuit(1)
# Set the initial unitary using the result from t
he
# previous example and apply it to q0
qc_init.unitary(unitary, [0])
# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc_init, simulator)
# Execute and obtain the unitary matrix of the ci
rcuit
result = simulator.run(transpiled_qc).result()
# Retrieve the unitary matrix from the result
unitary_result = result.get_unitary(transpiled_qc
)
# Print the unitary matrix results representing t

he
# circuit
print("Unitary of the circuit:\n", unitary_result
)
The results from the initialized circuit are now the same as the previous circuit,
without the need to add any of the gates used to generate this unitary matrix. The
output result is represented as a unitary operator:
Unitary of the circuit:
Operator([[ 0.70710678+0.00000000e+00j, 0.70710
678+8.65956056e-17j],
[-0.70710678-8.65956056e-17j, 0.707106
78+1.73191211e-16j]],
input_dims=(2,), output_dims=(2,))
We’ve seen how the unitary simulator is an exceptional component to use should
you wish to experiment using a predefined unitary matrix. Using the unitary
simulator, we learned how to calculate the unitary operator from a given
quantum circuit, and how to create a circuit from a unitary.
Now that we have a better understanding of the various simulators and the
differences between them, we’ll use them to simulate some of the noise we get
when running a circuit on a real quantum device. You’ve also learned about the
various options and parameters each simulator has available to you so you can
leverage each one in multiple ways to obtain various results, such as count and
state vector information, from the provided quantum circuit. This will help
simulate the results from circuits where noise models affect the outcome, as
opposed to the results from running on an ideal, noiseless simulator. So, let’s
generate the noise models in the next section.

Accounting for noise in
quantum circuits
Noise models are used to represent various noise effects that cause errors in
quantum circuits. The origin of the noise stems from many sources within the
quantum system. Based on the currently available devices and those coming in
the near future, the number of errors on a device could be significant, depending
on the quantum circuit executed on them.
In this section, we will review the various types of errors that can affect a qubit,
gates, and readouts. We will also learn how to generate noise models either
based on the configuration information from the real devices, or noise models
created by ourselves, with which we can simulate the real devices using the Aer
simulators.
Implementing an Aer noise model
We’ll begin by demonstrating how to implement the various types of noise
models that are prebuilt in the Aer noise libraries that will help make our
experiments seem more realistic:
1. We’ll create the same simple circuit we have used in most of our examples,
the Bell state, which includes a Hadamard and CNOT gate, followed by a
set of measurement operators, and execute it on an ideal simulator, with no
errors. This should result in the expected values of 00 and 11:
# Create a 2-qubit circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
# Add some arbitrary gates and measurement
operators
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0, 1)

qc.measure([0, 1], [0, 1])
backend = AerSimulator()
# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc= transpile(qc, backend)
# Run the circuit on the Aer simulator
result = backend.run(transpiled_qc).result
()
# Obtain and counts
counts = result.get_counts(transpiled_qc)
# Plot the count results on a histogram
plot_distribution(counts)
The results from this circuit on an ideal simulator are as follows. Notice
we only obtain two values, 00 and 11, as expected:
Figure 9.13: Results from an ideal simulator with no effects of noise
2. Now we will execute the same circuit on an actual device instead of a
simulator. To save time, let’s find the least busy device that has enough

qubits to run our experiment as well. Keep in mind the time to complete
this on a quantum system may vary depending on your position in the
queue:
# Let's set the number of qubits needed an
d get the least busy
num_qubits = 2
backend = service.least_busy(min_num_qubit
s = num_qubits, simulator = False, operati
onal=True)
# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, backend)
# Run the circuit
options = Options(optimization_level=0)
shots=1000
with Session(service=service, backend=back
end) as session:
sampler = Sampler(session=session, opt
ions=options)
job = sampler.run(circuits=transpiled_
qc, shots=shots)
result = job.result()
print('Quasi dist results: ', result.q
uasi_dists[0])
The results are very similar to that of the earlier execution on the
simulator, only this time, notice there are some errors in the results. Rather
than only obtaining results of 0 and 3, we see a few instances of 1 and 2.
These are the effects of backend noise on the results of the circuit:
Quasi distribution results: {0: 0.4932329554

7592433, 1: 0.01753366164023622, 2: -0.009464
115736336355, 3: 0.49869749862017565}
3. Now, let’s do something interesting. Let’s make use of a noise model based
on the properties of a specific backend device. Aer’s NoiseModel
provides the ability to do this with a simple method call.
In this following code snippet, we will generate a noise model based on
ibmq_kyoto and its properties: coupling_map, which describes
how the qubits are physically connected to each other on the physical
device, and the available basis gates. When executing the quantum circuit,
we will provide the noise model, coupling_map, and basis gates. This
way, when executing the quantum circuit on the simulator, it will simulate
the results as experiencing the same effects that would occur when running
the circuit on a real device, noise and all:
# Import the NoiseModel
from qiskit_aer.noise import NoiseModel
# Obtain an available backend to simulate
backend = service.get_backend('ibm_kyoto')
# Create the noise model based on the backend
properties
noise_model = NoiseModel.from_backend(backend
)
# Get coupling map from backend
coupling_map = backend.configuration().coupli
ng_map
# Get basis gates from noise model
basis_gates = noise_model.basis_gates
# Get the Aer simulator to apply noise model
noisy_simulator = AerSimulator()
# Execute the circuit on the simulator with t

he backend
# properties, and generated noise model
result = noisy_simulator.run(transpiled_qc,
coupling_map=coupling_map,
basis_gates=basis_gates,
noise_model=noise_model).res
ult()
# Obtain and print results
counts = result.get_counts()
plot_distribution(counts)
The following plot of the results of the preceding code, as you can see, is not as
ideal as before. We can observe a few errors here:
Figure 9.14: Results from a simulator with noise effects based on a specified backend
Now that we can simulate the effects of noise from a backend system onto a
simulator, let’s develop an understanding of what the cause is of some of these
noise effects.

Tracing the source of noise
When executing quantum circuits on a real device, there are various effects that
can cause errors in our computations. In this section, we will review some of
those effects so that when you’re generating or building your noise models, you
will have a better understanding of how they affect each qubit.
Understanding decoherence
Decoherence is defined as the loss of quantum coherence due to a quantum
system’s physical interaction with its environment. Decoherence affects each
qubit in many ways, one of which is when each qubit starts in a ground state,
and we operate on the qubit to move it from the state to the state. For
example, we say the qubit has transitioned from the ground state, , to the
excited state, . An analogy for this is to think of yourself sitting peacefully
and perfectly at rest. This peaceful relaxed moment is you in the ground state.
Then, imagine someone jumping out of nowhere and screaming at you! You’re
immediately startled as your heart rate jumps up and your adrenaline kicks in.
This is you now in the excited state. Now, after telling the person who startled
you to never do that again, you manage to catch your breath and get your heart
rate down. You begin to relax and get your body back down to the grounded
state it was in before. The time required to change from the excited state to the
grounded state is, coincidentally, called the style relaxation time. Of course, one
very important thing to note is that while it is ideal for us as humans to quickly
get back to our relaxed state, for a quantum system, it is ideal for this time to
stay in the set state for as long as possible. This will ensure that whichever state
we place a qubit in, it maintains that state as long as possible.
The relaxation time, denoted as T1, is the time constant of the longitudinal loss
(oriented along the z axis) of the signal intensity. Another decoherence effect is
dephasing, denoted as T2, where the phase information spreads out widely so

that the phase information is lost. We will cover details on how the information
is lost in the next chapter. An example of this is if we set the qubit to the
state. The dephasing time is a decay constant time where the initial state decays
down to a mixed state of and , where it is difficult to predict the state of
the system and is not perfectly in a superposition state and tends to collapse.
There are two ways to measure T1 and T2 decoherence times:
To measure T1, you would apply a series of pulses separated by a fixed time
delay and capture the statistical results of the state as it moves from to
. The oscillations that show up in the measurements after applying pulses of
varying lengths or amplitudes are called Rabi oscillations.
To measure T2, you would set the state of the qubit to or , and then
apply pulses at sequences to apply a phase rotation. After applying a
particular sequence of pulses over time, the state should return to its
original position, that is, or . If dephasing occurs, then the result will
have a lower probability of returning to its original starting position. This
technique of measuring T2 is called a spin echo.
Now that we are a bit more familiar with the sources of noise, let’s shift our
discussion to the contributors to decoherence and how they vary based on their
sources. There are generally two source types – intrinsic and extrinsic:
Intrinsic noise, often regarded as generic in nature, originates from sources
within the system, such as temperature, or defects within the system, so
essentially, materials or defects.
Extrinsic noise originates from environmentally coupled systems such as
wave interference, vibrations, and electromagnetic fields.
Let’s run a quick example of thermal relaxation on a pair of qubits as this is
generally intrinsic to a qubit. In the following example, we will define our T1
and T2 values in seconds and apply them to a set of basis gates for all qubits.

These values can be set to whatever time constant you wish; the time value
provided in the backend properties is stated as an average so it is not likely your
results would be the same each time. One thing to note is that the parameters you
set must be true for the following, , otherwise an error will be thrown.
We’ll then run a sample circuit with these thermal relaxation errors to see the
difference. The circuit that we will create and execute will be the same Bell state
circuit we created earlier and ran on a simulator, so we can compare the results:
# Initialize your T1 and T2 time constant values
in seconds
t1 = 0.0125
t2 = 0.0025
# Apply the T1 and T2 to create the thermal relax
ation error
from qiskit_aer.noise import thermal_relaxation_e
rror
t_error = thermal_relaxation_error(t1, t2, 0.01)
# Add the errors to a noise model
# and apply to all basis gates on all qubits
noise_model = NoiseModel()
noise_model.add_all_qubit_quantum_error(t_error, [
'id', 'rz', 'sx','u1', 'u2', 'u3'])
# Print out the noise model
print(noise_model)
#Create the same 2-qubit quantum circuit as before
qc_error = QuantumCircuit(2,2)
qc_error.h(0)
qc_error.cx(0,1)
qc_error.measure(range(2), range(2))
# Set the simulator
simulator = QasmSimulator()

# Transpile the circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc_error, simulator)
# Apply the noise model we created and run the ci
rcuit
result = simulator.run(transpiled_qc, shots=1024,
basis_gates=noise_model.basis_gates, noise_model
=noise_model).result()
# Obtain result counts
counts = result.get_counts(transpiled_qc)
# Plot the result counts
plot_distribution(counts)
The NoiseModel output provides a description of the noise model by
indicating which basis gates are available, which gate instructions would be
affected by the noise, and which basis gates errors are applied to the qubits.
Keep in mind, that the results may vary based on available backend systems:
NoiseModel:
, 'u3']
Instructions with noise: ['sx', 'id', 'u1', 'u3'
, 'u2', 'rz']
All-qubits errors: ['id', 'rz', 'sx', 'u1', 'u2'
, 'u3']
As you will see, the results after executing this circuit on the simulator with the
generated noise are not quite the same as before. In the earlier case, without
errors, we had a very close 50/50 split between 00 and 11. However, as you can
see in the following screenshot, the result is more of a 75/25 split between 00
and 11. This, of course, is due to the thermal relaxation error we added to the

simulator, thus causing much of the results to encounter a relaxation from the
excited state to the ground state, as illustrated in the following plot:
Figure 9.15: Results on a simulator with thermal relaxation errors
Both T1 and T2 are environmental effects that act upon the qubits and their
ability to maintain their states. Other effects that contribute to the overall noise
of a system are contributed by the gates that manipulate the qubits. Let’s look at
a few of them now.
Understanding single-gate, multi-gate,
and readout errors
Single-gate errors and multi-gate errors are generally introduced when a qubit
is operated upon by the various gates on the system. These errors are based on
probabilities that the gate applied to the qubit may not operate exactly as
expected. For example, if we apply a 5% gate error probability to a single-qubit
gate such as a NOT gate, then the result of the operation has a 5% probability of

not resulting in the expected value. The single-gate error could be from poor gate
fidelity, whereas the multi-gate error could be from crosstalk or spectator noise
from neighboring qubits, or from the physical connection between the qubits.
The Aer library has a list of noise model methods to choose from, including
Pauli error, depolarizing error, amplitude damping error, and many more
for us to use.
Single-gate and multi-gate errors can be applied to all qubits at once using the
add_all_qubit_quantum_error() method contained in the
NoiseModel class. This method applies a quantum error object to the noise
model for the specified basis gates, which is then applied to all qubits. The first
argument is the quantum error, and the second is the list of basis gates to apply
the error to.
Readout errors are those that occur when a measurement and acquisition are
triggered to read out the value of the qubit. During the operations of measuring
and acquiring the signal from the qubit, errors can exist that may interfere with
the results of the qubit measurement. The NoiseModel class also has methods
available to add readout errors to the noise model.
Let’s build our own noise model with single-qubit, multi-qubit, and readout
errors on a circuit to observe the effects of these errors on our quantum circuit.
Building your own noise model
There may be times when you wish to build your own custom noise models.
Whether it’s to generate specific errors to test your error-mitigation methods or
to create something resembling a specific device, having the ability to customize
your own noise model is a handy feature to have available.
In the following steps, we will set the single- and multi-qubit errors and view the
results. We will then set the readout errors and run them on the same circuit just

to visualize the difference in the results when measurement errors are introduced
to an ideal system. The single-qubit error will have an amplitude dampening
error, the multi-qubit error will have a depolarizing error, and the readout error
will be applied to both qubits in the circuit:
1. We’ll begin by defining our quantum circuit and transpiling it with the
simulator:
# Create quantum circuit qc_error = Quantu
mCircuit(2,2)qc_error.h(0)qc_error.cx(0,1)
qc_error.measure(range(2), range(2))# Let'
s get the qasm simulator
simulator = QasmSimulator()# Transpile the
circuit
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc_error, simula
tor)
2. Next, we’ll begin by defining the single- and multi-qubit probability error
values, followed by initializing and setting the depolarizing errors, first to
the single qubit, and then to the multi-qubit error:
# Import the error classes and methods
from qiskit_aer.noise import depolarizing_
error
from qiskit_aer.noise import ReadoutError
# Single and multi-qubit probability error
single_qubit_gate_p = 0.25
multi_qubit_gate_p = 0.1
# Apply the depolarizing quantum errors
single_error = depolarizing_error(single_q
ubit_gate_p, 1)
multi_error = depolarizing_error(multi_qub

it_gate_p, 2)
3. Next, we will create our NoiseModel object and add both the single- and
multi-qubit errors. The single qubit error will be assigned to the basis gate
u2, and the multi-qubit error will be assigned to the CNOT (cx) gate:
# Add the single and multi-qubit errors to
the noise # model
noise_model = NoiseModel()
noise_model.add_all_qubit_quantum_error(si
ngle_error, ['u2'])
noise_model.add_all_qubit_quantum_error(mu
lti_error, ['cx'])
# Print out the noise model
print(noise_model)
4. We’ll now print out the NoiseModel to confirm out noise model entries
are set. As we can see from the output of the noise model, we have a list of
all basis gates available, a list of instructions that have been assigned noise,
and a list of all the basis states that will affect all of the qubits in our circuit:
NoiseModel:
2']
Instructions with noise: ['u2', 'cx']
All-qubits errors: ['u2', 'cx']
5. Now, let’s add this to our simulator and run it with both the single and
multi-qubit noise model:
# Run the circuit on the simulator with th

e noise model
result = simulator.run(transpiled_qc, shot
s=1024, basis_gates=noise_model.basis_gate
s, noise_model=noise_model).result() # Obt
ain the counts and plot the results
counts = result.get_counts(transpiled_qc)p
lot_distribution(counts)
6. This will result in the following histogram:
Figure 9.16: Results on a simulator with single and multi-qubit errors
7. As you can see, the errors we introduced had an effect on our results and we
now get some unexpected values, 01 and 10, which we didn’t expect or see
in our ideal case when running on a system with no noise. However, even
with the noise, we can see that our results are correct in that we still have a
high probability of the states 00 and 11. So here, the noise is minimal so
that we can get some good results. Let’s try a different error next and

increase the noise to see what we get when we have very noisy readout
errors.
8. Next, let’s include some readout errors. Readout errors are defined in the
Aer API documentation as follows:
Classical readout errors are specified by a list of assignment probabilities
vectors P(A|B), where A is the recorded classical bit value, and B is the
true bit value returned from the measurement.
This means that the probabilities of the expected values will be recorded
and used to apply readout errors based on the probability values we pass in
as arguments to the noise model.
The equation for a single-qubit readout probability vector is defined as
follows:
When constructing the ReadoutError class, P(A|B) is provided as the
argument. For our example, we will provide the probability of 0 given 1 as
0.7, and the probability of 1 given 0 as 0.2. We will also add our
readout error to the noise model and print out the results, as illustrated in
the following code:
Note, of course, that these values we are setting are very
high and do not necessarily need to add up to 1. I’m using
them to highlight the impact noise has, in this case, in a
very exaggerated yet visually recognizable way to see that
the errors are actually pulling the results away from the
expected values into the biased values.
# Set the readout error probabilities for 0 g

iven 1,
# & 1 given 0,
p0_1 = 0.7
p1_0 = 0.2
p0 = 1 – p1_0
p1 = 1 - p1_1 # Construct a noise model
noise_model = NoiseModel()
# Construct the ReadoutError with the probabi
lities
readout_error = ReadoutError([[p0, p1_0], [p0
_1, p1]])
# Apply the readout error to all qubits
noise_model.add_all_qubit_readout_error(reado
ut_error)
# Print the noise model
print(noise_model)
We will see the addition of some instructions and listings of qubits in the
result. The first line specifies Basis gates, and the following line is
the list of Instructions with noise added to them. Notice that it
now only includes the measure instruction. Next, we see the qubits that
have been specified for a particular noise – in this case, we added the
readout error to all qubit measurement operators:
NoiseModel:
Instructions with noise: ['measure']
All-qubits errors: ['measure']
Now that we have our readout noise model complete, we’ll add our custom noise
model and run it on the Aer simulator to see the results.

Similar to the previous example, where we included a thermal relaxation noise
model, we will provide the readout noise model in the same manner:
# Run the circuit with the readout error noise mo
del
result = simulator.run(transpiled_qc, shots=1024,
basis_gates=noise_model.basis_gates, noise_
model=noise_model).result()
# Obtain the result counts and print
counts = result.get_counts(transpiled_qc)
plot_distribution(counts)
The results, as you can see in the following plot, are now not as ideal as before:
Figure 9.17: Result with effects from our custom noise model on a quantum circuit
We can observe various errors here, caused by the readout noise. First and
foremost, our expected results of 00 and 11 are no longer easily visible from our

results. In this sense, we see that the readout of each qubit has a higher
probability of 0 given 1, which therefore causes the probability results to be
higher for the values 00, 01, and 10. This is caused by the readout errors that are
applied to all the qubits, which greatly reduces the probability of 1.
The advantage of all this noise is that you have an insight as to the cause of this
noise based on the type of noise we included, and the amount of noise applied to
a specified qubit(s). This allows you to simulate certain noise effects should you
wish to work on some noise-mitigating techniques.
By applying noise and understanding its effects, you can create noise-mitigating
techniques and verify the results on a simulator. By doing this, you can test
various combinations of noise effects, which can help minimize the error rate on
some algorithms, and therefore increase the performance of the quantum
computer. We will look at noise-mitigating techniques in the next chapter.
Summary
In this chapter, we covered various simulators. You now have the skills to
leverage various simulators to simulate running circuits on a quantum computer
and obtain specific content from the circuits, such as state vectors and unitary
matrices.
We also covered various visualization techniques. The skills that you have
gained will help you visualize the various pieces of information from the
simulator, such as visualizing the state and phase information of a qubit using the
qsphere and plotting state vector graphs.
And finally, we looked into the noise models that Qiskit provides by either
extracting the noise from an existing quantum computer or creating our own
noise models and applying them to the simulators.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to characterize and mitigate noise. This

will allow us to optimize the performance of the quantum computer and increase
its computational power.
Questions
1. Can you list all the simulators found in the Qiskit Aer module?
2. Create a qsphere representation of a qubit on the negative y axis, creating
the state , using only a single Hadamard gate along with the phase
gates.
3. When initializing a set of qubits in a circuit, what must the total probability
across all states be?
4. Can you use the qsphere to visualize both the phase and probability
information of a qubit?
5. What would happen if you set the depolarization error values close to 1?
6. If you applied a readout error equally to all qubits, what results would you
expect, and why?
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

10
Suppressing and Mitigating
Quantum Noise
In the previous edition of this book, you may recall a chapter which discussed, in
a reasonable amount of detail, the different types of noise that affect various
quantum systems. Since then, there has been an incredible amount of research
that has evolved not only the hardware but the software as well. Due to the
changes since then, which includes a few major refactorization iterations of
Qiskit, for example, the deprecation of Ignis and its many test circuit libraries, I
thought it might be a good time to shift into the latest and not spend too much
time on how to test a system, but rather understand how to leverage the latest
error suppression and mitigation techniques. Of course, I don’t want to leave you
too far in the dark, so I will cover some of the fundamentals of what these noises
are and how they affect your experiments. However, I do want to ensure we
cover the current era of quantum utility
(https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-06096-3),
which entails using error suppression and mitigation techniques to help you find
some useful quantum applications. We should expect to see some advancements
as the systems evolve and get wider (more qubits) and deeper (complex quantum
circuits with thousands of 2-qubit gates), which can be seen as a great step
towards useful quantum applications without needing to wait for fault-tolerant
quantum computers.
Early quantum systems were commonly referred to as near-term devices, which

generally means they are close to becoming fully fault-tolerant quantum
systems. One of the reasons for this is that all current quantum systems, no
matter what technology they use to create qubits, are affected by noise in some
shape or form, which increases the error rates of these systems. To address, and
in turn minimize the error rates, it helps to understand what causes these errors
and how can we suppress or mitigate them. Keep in mind that the study of errors
in any one of the following examples could easily qualify as a research topic,
which is why we will simply touch on some examples but if you are interested in
more details, I will provide some reference materials at the end of the chapter.
For now, this chapter is merely an overview with some examples to help you get
an idea on how to create some of these noise models using the functionalities
provided to you in Qiskit and how to suppress and mitigate against them using
features included in the Qiskit Runtime. The goal here is to help you optimize
the effectiveness of your quantum circuits, which in turn helps you design your
applications to be as resistant as possible to the various forms of errors.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Understanding the Qiskit Runtime Service
Understanding Sessions
Understanding the Qiskit Runtime Options
Understanding Primitives
Understanding the Sampler primitive
Understand the noise effects of decoherence
Differences between error suppression, mitigation, and correction
In this chapter, we will cover one of the challenges faced by most quantum
systems: noise. By the end of the chapter, you will understand some of the
varying noise effects, such as relaxation and dephasing. Then, you’ll get an
overview of the latest advancements in the Qiskit Runtime Service and learn
about the building blocks to run your circuits efficiently on any backend system.

Finally, you will learn about the error suppression and error mitigation
techniques and how to apply them to your complex quantum circuits.
In previous versions of Qiskit, there was a module titled, Ignis, which was the
module that contained libraries to characterize and mitigate against noise. Since
then, the Ignis library has been deprecated, so it is recommended that you read
the Qiskit Migration Guide on the Qiskit GitHub page
(https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-ignis#migrationguide), particularly if you want to use many of the recent advancements.
In quantum systems, noise originates from various sources: thermal heat from
electronics, decoherence, dephasing, crosstalk, or signal loss. Here, we will see
how to measure the effects of noise on a qubit, and how to mitigate readout
error noise to optimize our results. In the end, we will compare the differences to
better understand the effects and ways to mitigate them using other techniques
such as dynamical decoupling, which is used to help reduce noise caused by
decoherence of a qubit when its state is left idle for too long.
Before we get started with all of that, we need to first get familiar with one of the
newest features that will help bring all these techniques to our fingertips and
allow us to adjust them all as needed: the Qiskit Runtime service.
Technical requirements
In this chapter, we will cover some refreshers on simulating noise, so if you have
some knowledge of signal to noise theory, this will help. If not, review Chapter
9, Simulating Quantum Systems and Noise Models, to get an understanding of
the various forms of noise that affect quantum systems. This will help you
understand how to suppress and mitigate errors on a quantum computer using the
Qiskit Runtime.
Here is the full source code used throughout this book:

https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
Understanding the Qiskit
Runtime service
For those of you who have used earlier versions of Qiskit, you may have been
using the execute() or backend.run() functions to run quantum circuits
on a quantum system. This was good to run some basic quantum circuits for
learning purposes on small quantum systems with less than 100 qubits. However,
if we want to start to think about the future and how we can create circuits for
hundreds, thousands, and even millions of qubits, then we will need to think
about how to optimally do so without just throwing a large circuit onto a single
machine. This is where the Qiskit Runtime Service comes in very handy. Not
only does it include many new options, such as selecting the optimization and
resilience levels, which we will learn about later in this chapter, but it also
includes all the transpilation features we covered earlier, so we won’t necessarily
lose what we have learned so far. In this section, we will cover what the Qiskit
Runtime is and how you can execute your circuits using it. Knowing how to use
the Qiskit Runtime will also help you later in this chapter, when we learn about
the various error suppression and mitigation techniques and how they are applied
to your quantum circuit.
Let’s begin by learning more about the Qiskit Runtime Service, how is it
different from the execute function, and what new features we can use to
optimize executing our quantum circuits on a quantum system.
First, let’s create a new notebook and import a few Qiskit Runtime objects,
functions, and instantiate the QiskitRuntimeService class, using our
helper file.

Note, at the time of writing, there has been a switch from the
current Sampler version to SamplerV2. In the following code, it
is assumed that the “V2” will be removed. If for some reason it
is not, then please update Sampler to SamplerV2 to ensure
you are using the latest version of the Sampler.
Another important step is that you must use the token parameter to set either
your IBM Quantum or IBM Cloud API token, as illustrated in the following code
snippet. If you do not set this, you will likely get an error, and when trying to
access the Qiskit Runtime service, it will not work.
# Loading your IBM Quantum account(s)
service = QiskitRuntimeService(channel="ibm_quant
um", token="API_TOKEN")
Now that you have your notebook setup, let’s dig into some of the execution
mode descriptions..
Understanding Sessions
A Session is in essence a collection of Jobs that is guaranteed to run on the
backend without any interruptions from other user Jobs, particularly those that
require multiple iterations, such as those that are based on variational algorithms:
Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE), and Quantum Approximate
Optimization Algorithm (QAOA). In other words, “without interruptions”
means that the Qiskit Runtime will ensure that each Job will complete, including
the period where the variables are being adjusted between classical and quantum
resources, where in the past this time was used to interleave Jobs from another
user in the queue.

To understand the practicality of this format, imagine standing in a long queue
waiting your turn to submit a form, like renewing your driver’s license. After
waiting a few hours, you’re finally at the window and handing over your form,
only to be told that you need to adjust some values in the form. This is where the
difference comes in. In the previous version, you would have to stand off to the
side and update the form fields; meanwhile, someone else will move up to the
window. Now, if you happen to be ready, you now must wait for that other
person to finish before you can continue. This, of course, might take a long time,
causing you to wait longer. What Sessions allows you to do is keep that window
free and available for you until you finish updating the form and then turn it in.
Regarding what the default and max times are for both the interactive and
maximum time values, I would refer you to the Qiskit Runtime documentation
https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit-ibmruntime/runtime_service ) as these values might change over time.
However, time in the queue does count towards the maximum time of the
Session. The idle time could be used to perform any classical operations based
on the results of the Job and/or prepare for the subsequent Job in the Session.
Each Job can be set as part of a batch of Jobs to ensure that they run on the same
device or closely together to avoid the issues that can occur if they are run on
separate systems or far apart, which would introduce strangeness to our results
due to device characteristics or device drift. To learn more about device drift, see
the Further reading section at the end of this chapter. At the time of writing,
there are upcoming features that will further optimize execution of circuits, so do
keep an eye on the documentation and information feeds for details and
examples.
Before we start coding, let’s get familiar with the other classes first as this will
simplify our coding experience moving forward. In the next section, we will
look at the options that we can set to our Session class. The Options class

will also be very important later when suppressing and mitigating errors.
Understanding the Qiskit Runtime
Options
RuntimeOptions is a class used to set the various parameters for the Qiskit
Runtime execution options. Parameters are used to select which quantum system
to use and which optimization or resilience levels to use that enable various error
suppression or error mitigation features. Below is a list of Options parameters
that are used for the various Qiskit Runtime primitives. Keep in mind that, as
always, you should check the latest version of Qiskit API documentation to
ensure your code is always current:
Environment parameters such as log_level (DEBUG, INFO, etc.), and
callback for any interim or final results, which will receive two
positional parameters: Job ID and Job result
Execution parameters for execution time options, such as number of
shots(int), and init_qubits(bool), which will reset the qubits
to the ground state for each shot the (default is true)
max_execution_time is the maximum time, in seconds, after which a
job is canceled. If this is not set, the default will be the time limit of the
Primitive. If it is set, then the time must be set between 300 seconds and the
maximum execution time set for the simulator or device, which can be
found in the Qiskit API documentation:
https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/guides/max-executiontime.
optimization_level sets the level of optimization to the circuit. The
higher the level, the more optimal and therefore longer the transpilation
time. These optimization levels also include error suppression such as
dynamical decoupling, which we will cover later in this chapter. There are

four optimization_level settings. The default value is set to the
highest, 3:
0 – no optimization, uses basic translation, whichever layout is
specified, and routing (uses stochastic swaps by default)
1 – light optimization, routing (uses SabreSWAP, 1Q gate
optimization, and dynamical decoupling for error suppression)
2 – medium optimization, layout and routing are the same as
level 1, but includes heuristic optimization with a greater search
depth and trials of optimization and dynamical decoupling for
error suppression
3 – high optimization, layout and routing are the same as level 2
and include further optimization with greater efforts/trials, 2qubit KAK optimization, and dynamical decoupling for error
suppression
resilience_level sets the level of resilience to mitigate errors. The
higher the resilience level, the higher the accuracy of your results. Higher
results are like that of the optimization level where it will cause longer
transpilation time. These resilience levels range from 0 to 2, where level 1
is the default value and is only available for the Estimator primitive. It is
important to note that as the technology evolves, so does the
implementation and mitigation of these techniques. Please refer to the latest
documentation to ensure your code is running the latest version
(https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/guides/configureerror-mitigation ).
0 – no mitigation.
1 – (default) minimal mitigation, which minimizes readout
errors. The Estimator primitive uses the Twirled Readout Error
Extinction.
2 – medium mitigation, used to minimize bias in a circuit but

indicates that it is not guaranteed to be zero, using the same as
level 1 and includes Zero Noise Extrapolation.
Now that we’re familiar with all the options we can set to optimize and run
circuits on our backend systems, let’s continue to move forward and learn what
the Primitive classes are all about.
Understanding Primitives
Primitives, as defined on the Qiskit documentation, are generally the
“foundational building blocks for designing and optimizing quantum
workloads.” At the time of writing, there are two primitives within the Qiskit
Runtime: Sampler and Estimator. Each of these provides a simple way to
encapsulate your circuit and leverage each of its features to optimize workloads
during execution to optimize running them on multiple quantum systems at
scale. If you recall in the previous chapters, when we built and applied
optimization levels to our circuit, it involved quite a bit of work, and the
optimization was based on a single quantum system that we selected to run on.
You can imagine the number of steps and overhead that would require if we
needed to do that for each different system that executes our circuit. With the
interface provided by the primitives, a lot of that is taken care of for us by
applying a handful of option settings and selections. The runtime will then apply
these accordingly as it selects multiple systems to execute the circuits. The
primitives each perform a specific task and serve as the entry point to the Qiskit
Runtime service. Let’s look at each primitive to get a little understanding of their
functionality and the differences between them. In this chapter, we will focus on
the Sampler primitive. The IBM Quantum Learning platform has some very
good examples, courses, and tutorials that you can learn from in much greater
detail than I can provide in this one chapter.

Understanding the Sampler primitive
The Sampler primitive is similar to what we have used throughout this book in
that it takes a quantum circuit as its input and generates a quasi-probability
result. The result of this is also error-mitigated to ensure that the results are as
precise as possible. Example of Sampler primitive circuits are Grover’s search
and Deutsch-Jozsa. The Sampler can be modified to allow changes such as
backends (local simulator or quantum system), which simplifies the management
of your circuits and how they are run on the backend in accordance with the
needs of your experiments. This is very helpful as each primitive has its own
form of operating on the quantum circuit when executed on a quantum system,
therefore certain properties or mitigating techniques will not work on some
primitives based on the way they perform their tasks.
Well, so far, we’ve done quite a bit of reading, why don’t we get back to some
coding. Let’s create a new Qiskit notebook and run a simple circuit using the
Sampler to try it out. We’ll also include the classes mentioned earlier so we can
wrap everything together in a simple construct of a circuit.
First, we’ll create a simple circuit:
# Create a simple circuit:
from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegiste
r, ClassicalRegister,
transpile
from qiskit.visualization import plot_distributio
n
q_reg = QuantumRegister(4, name='qr')
c_reg = ClassicalRegister(4, name='cr')
qc = QuantumCircuit(q_reg, c_reg)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0, 1)
qc.cx(1, 2)

qc.cx(2, 3)
qc.draw(output="mpl")
This will display the following circuit that we wish to run:
Figure 10.1: Simple circuit to run on the system
Now, here’s where the fun starts! Let’s begin by following the Qiskit Patterns so
we are not only ensuring that our circuits are efficient but also our development
patterns.
Qiskit Patterns are a 4-step process that we can use to help integrate our quantum
computation circuits into a larger application layer. The 4 steps are Map,
Optimize, Execute, and Post-process. We’ll go through each of these steps so
that you can get familiar with running circuits optimally on a quantum system.
We’ll start with what we just did: map our problem into a quantum circuit.
Step 1: Map
Mapping a problem to a quantum circuit can be done in many ways. We can
probably write volumes of books that could be dedicated to this. This is because
it not only depends on the problem we’re trying to solve, but also how we can
best map our input data and problem solution into a quantum state or initial state.
This is similar to planning a trip. If I were to ask you to plan a group trip to New
York, there could be many options and even more questions regarding how to get

there? Where will everyone be? Are they all in the same location at the
beginning of the trip. How long will they be available? These are similar
questions we need to consider. How do we get the data to the quantum systems?
Where is all the data, at that moment, and how long will the data be there? Once
we have obtained the input data the next step is to translate it from classical
information into a quantum state or input for our circuit. Let’s do this now with a
simple example, the circuit we built earlier in this chapter. In Chapter 13, we
will cover a more sophisticated problem, Grover’s search. For now, to allow us
to focus on the overall process, we’ll stick with the simple circuit, and some
random circuits.
So far, we have mapped a problem into a quantum state, in this case the circuit
we constructed above. That’s step one, Map, done.
Let’s now run this circuit using a Statevector class to get the expected
results before running on a quantum system. Since this is a small and simple
quantum circuit, we can simulate this easily on a classical system such as the one
you have at home or in your office. If the circuit or problem involved a large
number of qubits that you would be unable to run on a classical system, then the
preferred way to do this would be to reduce the problem size to something you
can run on a classical system so that you can confirm the expected result at a
smaller scale and then run on a quantum system to get the full-scale results.
from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector
# Pass the circuit instructions into the Statevec
tor
results = Statevector.from_instruction(qc).probab
ilities_dict()
plot_distribution(results)
This will display the expected results in the following diagram:

Figure 10.2: Expected probability results from the circuit using Statevector
Next, we can prepare this to run on an actual backend. To do this, we need to
include measurement operators in our circuit, which we will do, and then obtain
the least busy backend system to run this circuit:
# Add measurements to our circuit
qc.measure_all(add_bits=False)
# Select the least busy backend system to run cir
cuit
backend = service.least_busy(simulator=False, ope
rational=True)
print("Least busy backend: ", backend)
This will print out the selected backend, which is the least busy at the time it is
called.

Step 2: Optimize
Now we can prepare our circuit to run on the backend by transpiling it
accordingly. To do this, we will use the new preset_passmanager
function, which is a new addition to the Qiskit transpiler library that allows
you to set, run, and draw the result of the circuit after transpilation. Aligning a
circuit to a target backend is ideal in that it will optimize the circuit to that
selected backend by applying not only the general passes available but also AI
generated optimizers that introduce further improvements.
from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import
generate_preset_pass_manager
target = backend.target
pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(target=target,
optimization_level=3)
transpiled_qc = pm.run(qc)
transpiled_qc.draw(output="mpl", idle_wires=False
, style="iqp")
This displays the transpiled circuit specific to the selected backend target. Here,
you will note two differences from the original circuit. First, note the qubit
mapping has changed; qubit 0 is now assigned to qubit 73. In your case,
depending on which system was selected, it might point to other qubits. Next,
you’ll also note that there are more gates added. This is due to having to use
basis gates and connectivity between qubits (using ECR gates:
https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit
.library.ECRGate ) to connect between qubits that might not be adjacent
to each other. Results might differ here as your selected backend might have
different results.

Figure 10.3: Transpiled circuit
Now that we know how to transpile a circuit and set the optimization level
values, let’s now switch to a bit more complex circuit so we can push the
optimizer further and see the differences between the resulting circuits. We’ll use
a simple Grover operator to generate a circuit. Since we have not yet covered
Grover’s algorithm in much detail, let’s ease into it and just say that we will use
it to mark a state we wish the circuit to find. In this case, we will use the binary
representation 110. Grover’s algorithm will be discussed in Chapter 13.
from qiskit.circuit.library import GroverOperator
oracle = Statevector.from_label("110")
grover_qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
grover_qc.h(range(3))
grover_qc = grover_qc.compose(GroverOperator(orac
le))
grover_qc.draw(output="mpl")
This will result in the following circuit, where we have a set of Hadamard gates
followed by the Grover operator composite. Note that this is a composite that
represents a series of gates into a single block titled Q to simplify the
visualization of the circuit. You can run the decompose method a few times to
break it down to the basis gates.
In the next steps, we will transpile it with varying optimization level values and

compare the two so you can see the power that the transpiler optimizers
have on the circuit.
Figure 10.4: Grover operator circuit
The following will highlight the difference between optimization levels with the
complexities that accompany many circuits. To be more specific regarding the
comparisons, we will be observing the number of ECR gates, which is an
acronym for Echoed Cross-Resonance gate. They’re similar to CX gates but
with an echoing procedure, which mitigates a few unwanted terms. Details on
this gate can be found in the Qiskit Circuit Library. ECR gates, or any multisource/multi-target gates, are quite complex as they require additional gates to
generate connectivity. In this example, we will use the number of ECR gates to
compare the circuits.
Let’s first capture the Statevector results from the current circuit so we can
compare them to the results after transpiling and running on the quantum
systems:
results = Statevector.from_instruction(grover_qc)
.probabilities_dict()
Next, we’ll add measurement gates to this circuit and create multiple copies,
each with varying optimization_level values to compare:

grover_qc.measure_all()
transpiled_grover_qc = pm.run(grover_qc)
transpiled_grover_qc.draw(output="mpl", idle_wire
s=False, style="iqp")
The result here is a transpiled version of the original Grover circuit we created. I
have included a truncated portion of it in the following figure:
Figure 10.5: Transpiled Grover operator circuit (truncated)
As you can see, it is much more complex and with quite a few extra gates,
including ECR gates.
Now, let’s go through the circuit and assign a different
optimization_level value for each. In this case, we’ll compare the
extreme levels, one at 0, which is to say no optimization at all, and another at 3,
which is fully optimized. We’ll then add it to a circuits array to run on a
quantum system later.
circuits=[]
for optimization_level in [0,3]:
transpiled_grover_qc = transpile(grover_qc, b
ackend, optimization_level=optimization_level, se
ed_transpiler=1000)
print(f"ECR (Optimization level={optimization
_level}): ", transpiled_grover_qc.count_ops()["ec
r"])

circuits.append(transpiled_grover_qc)
This will display the number of ECR gates for each circuit. Note the difference
between the two circuits (they will vary based on system) is quite large when
compared with no optimization (level 0) and fully optimized (level 3).
ECRs (optimization_level=0): 24
ECRs (optimization_level=3): 14
Now that we have optimized our circuit by transpiling to the device with specific
optimization levels, let’s now run both circuits and compare the results, along
with the simulated results, on an actual quantum system.
This completes the optimize step and we move onto the next Qiskit Pattern,
executing the optimized circuit.
Step 3: Execute
Here, we will now run our circuit on the targeted backend, but this time with a
twist. We will use a new feature of the Qiskit Runtime called Batch. This will
allow us to provide a batch of operations to run on a quantum system.
To execute the circuits we created, we will first need to create a batch, which is
one of the execution modes of the Qiskit Runtime
(https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit-ibmruntime/qiskit_ibm_runtime.Batch ), and load it up with our circuit
and backend information first, then within the batch, we’ll run the Sampler
primitive on the backend and print the results.
with Batch(service=service, backend=backend):
sampler = Sampler()

job = sampler.run(
circuits=circuits,
skip_transpilation=True,
shots=8000
)
result = job.result()
This might take a while depending on where you are in the queue. But once it’s
complete, you should see the following results from your experiment, which
includes the quasi-probability results and the metadata from the experiment, in
this case the number of shots used to obtain the results.
SamplerResult(quasi_dists=[{0: 0.136596417234717,
1: 0.057482039100449, 2: 0.03807773583055, 3: 0.0
51080549862785, 4: 0.028575374054239, 5: 0.068434
342226471, 6: 0.540689745421478, 7: 0.07906379626
9311}, {0:
0.013241830253957, 1: 0.044991185036454, 2: 0.066
493715476242, 3: 0.033981414166734, 4: 0.07745285
5226391, 5: 0.045273457404358, 6: 0.6544805516366
03, 7: 0.064084990799261}], metadata=[{'shots': 8
000, 'circuit_metadata': {}, 'readout_mitigation_
overhead': 1.2784314899265776, 'readout_mitigatio
n_time': 0.03348202304914594}, {'shots': 8000, 'c
ircuit_metadata': {}, 'readout_mitigation_overhea
d': 1.0800027370262115, 'readout_mitigation_time'
: 0.0965154911391437}])
Let’s look at the results a little deeper. First, you will see a set of
quasi_dists. These are the results of the quasi-distribution from our
experiments. Since we ran a 3-qubit circuit, we should see 8 possible results, 0-

7, and the quasi-probabilities for each. This is then followed by some nice
information on the readout overhead for each circuit, which is simply the time it
took to read out the results for each circuit.
This now helps us move into the final step in the Qiskit Patterns, post-process.
Step 4: Post-process
In this final step of the Qiskit patterns, we will extract the results from the
quantum systems and do some post-processing. What exactly is post-processing?
Well, simply put, it’s whatever you wish it to be. You could extrapolate the
results and return them to the next task in your classical application to continue a
particular hybrid classical-quantum workflow, or you can simply provide the
results as an input to another classical or quantum computational task and
continue. In this case, we’ll keep it simple and just display the results visually to
compare them. We’ll compare the state vector results we computed earlier and
visualize them in comparison to the results from the two circuits we ran on a
quantum system. The following will display the results onto a histogram:
qc_results = [quasi_dist.binary_probabilities() f
or quasi_dist in result.quasi_dists]
plot_histogram(
qc_results + [results],
legend=[
"optimization_level=0",
"optimization_level=3",
"Simulated results"
],
bar_labels=False
)
The resulting plot will be as follows:

Figure 10.6: Post-processed results, visualization comparison
Here, you can see that our result is as expected, where the results from the
optimization at the higher level, 3, are closer to our simulated results, whereas
the results from the circuit without any optimization are less accurate.
This brings us to the next topic we need to discuss: noise. All quantum systems,
no matter the technology, have some form of noise or effect that the system has
that is related to noise. There are some technologies that isolate qubits from any
environmental noise; however, this also presents a disadvantage in that when we
want to alter the state of the qubit, the speed and fidelity might take longer than
other technologies. In this book, since we are using IBM Quantum systems, we
will focus on superconducting qubits and the effects that noise has on them. We
will, of course, also cover the latest advancements in both error suppression and
error mitigation, which over time will potentially provide us with useful
quantum applications. In the next section, we’ll begin by understanding the
differences between the types of noise and how they affect quantum systems.
Understanding the noise
effects of decoherence

We learned in Chapter 9, Simulating Quantum Systems and Noise Models, that
we can generate various noise models that are based on the configuration of a
specified quantum computer. After the configuration information is extracted, we
can then apply any one of an array of error functions to a local simulator, which
will reproduce similar error effects to what we would get from a quantum
computer.
In this section, we will expand on that to learn how these errors affect our
circuits over time. The two effects we will review here are the two most common
issues found in near-term quantum systems: relaxation and dephasing. These
are critical errors as they can affect the quantum state information, which would
result in erroneous responses.
Later in this chapter, we will also look at readout errors, another common
source of noise that originates when the system is applying a measurement pulse,
while in parallel, listening in on the acquisition channel. The results and
conversion from an analog pulse to a digital value (either 0 or 1) can introduce
many errors as well, which we will then try and mitigate.
We will start by learning about one of the most common and important effects of
noise in quantum systems: decoherence. The three main types of decoherence
are T1, T2, and T2*. Each of these represents a type of decoherence effect on
the qubit. We will begin by looking at each of them individually to understand
the differences between them and how to suppress and mitigate against them
when they are run on a real quantum device.
If you are deeply interested to learn how to analyze the effects of relaxation
(T1) and dephasing (T2/T2*), Chapter 9, Simulating Quantum Systems and
Noise Models, illustrates ways to create circuits that include noise models that
replicate each of the three. This will help you run experiments to analyze the
characterization of the device.
The next section provides a quick overview of both, just to get you to understand

which of them is affected when discussing the mitigation features.
Understanding decoherence
errors
T1, as we covered in Chapter 9, Simulating Quantum Systems and Noise Models,
is often referred to as the relaxation time. Relaxation time refers to the time it
takes the energy of a qubit to decay from the excited state ( ) back down to its
ground state ( ), as illustrated in the following graph, where indicates
the probability of 1, and is the probability of 0. The T1 time is defined as
the value when P(t) = 1/e (refer to the following diagram):
Figure 10.7: T1 defined as the decay time where the probability of the energy state reaches 1/e
When applying this to a quantum system, if you want to determine the amount of
time to reach T1 for any qubit, you would need to create a test circuit that places
the qubit in an excited state, . We know how to do this by simply applying an
X gate to the qubit and then waiting a given amount of time before measuring
that qubit. If you were to do this over a set number of time intervals, you will
likely start to see the results switch from the excited state transition to the ground
state.
So, what does all that mean? Let’s dig in a little bit and see how this applies to
quantum systems over time and on complex circuits.

We’ll start with a simple analogy to provide you with some intuitive
understanding of the concepts here. For those of you who already have
knowledge of these concepts, feel free to jump to the next section.
Imagine yourself just before or soon after New Year’s Eve making that same
resolution most of us make, me included, year after year of hitting the gym and
getting back in shape, particularly after the feasts we’ve enjoyed over the
holidays. Then, usually on the first or second week of January, we go to the gym
and our personal trainer takes us straight to the weights and asks us to pick a
weight. Now, one of the things we naturally do is try to pick up where we were
the last time we were at the gym and grab a heavy weight. Of course, at first it
seems a little heavy, but we power on. Our trainer then wants to test our strength
and asks us to hold the weight high over our heads with our arms extended. We
then raise the weight confidently over our heads and we’re excited that this
wasn’t too bad. Let’s call our ability to hold the weight over our heads the
excited state. OK, so let’s now say our trainer asks us to hold it there as long as
we can. What we will notice is that our strength can only sustain this position for
some time. We will then begin to feel the fatigue in our muscles, which will then
slowly, or in my case rather rapidly, start to lower down towards the original
position, which is with the weight down close to the ground, where I am no
longer feeling the strain of my muscles. Let’s call this the relaxed position, the
ground state.
A qubit pretty much follows this concept in that it will start at a ground state,
then sometime later we will amplify the qubit from the ground state to some
excited state. Now, just like us, over time we will return to that ground state to
relax. This relaxation from excited to ground state is, logically enough, called
amplitude relaxation, which may sound familiar because we learned about this in
the previous chapter when creating an amplitude dampening noise model to
represent decoherence.
Looking back at Figure 10.8, you can imagine this is what the effect

decoherence (T1) has on a qubit caused by its environment. What do we mean by
environment? I’m glad you asked! A qubit isn’t just a single aluminum-niobium
component with a Josephson Junction.
Oh no, no, no, it has so much more going on! Of course, depending on the
technology that the qubit relies on, superconducting, ion traps, photonics, etc. the
qubit is not sitting all alone. It is usually surrounded by various environment
variables that can interfere with and even at times speed up the decoherence of
the qubit. Superconducting qubits, for example, must sit at a certain temperature,
approximately 15 millikelvin, to work properly and make sure that the energy
levels between the ground and first excited state are precise to determine the
state of the qubit. Then, the pulse sent to the qubit has to have the right
amplitude, duration, frequency, etc. in order to place the qubit in the correct
state. Keep in mind that this could be difficult as the quantum system might be
very complex. For example, we defined one amplitude value as the excited state
as just one position earlier in our example: lifting the weight over our heads. But
what if we needed multiple amplitudes to encode our data? Then the precision of
our gates will need to be very exact, which means that the fidelity of the gates
also might influence our system. This is how decoherence, also referred to as the
relaxation rate or T1, if not suppressed, causes us to lose the quantum state
information of our circuit, which leads to errors when we read the results of our
circuits.
Understanding dephasing errors
T1, we learned in the previous section, refers to the decoherence or relaxation
rate caused when the amplitude of the qubit decays over time. Dephasing errors,
on the other hand, occur when the phase of the qubit is blurred, often referred to
either T2 or T2*. Dephasing is quite like decoherence in that we will also lose
state information over time, only in a slightly different manner.

To define dephasing simply means to lose phase information, of a qubit in this
case.
There are many different sources for dephasing noise, each of which has varying
properties. A few examples are:
White noise, when there is an equal amount of a signal that is of equal
intensity at varying frequencies.
Pink noise, often referred to as flicker noise, occurs usually in electronic
devices where the power density decreases with increasing frequency, i.e.,
1/f, where f is the frequency.
Flux noise, is found on the surface of superconducting quantum
interference devices, commonly referred to as SQUIDS, the source of
which are the magnetic spins on the surface of the SQUID.
Short of converting this from a developer to an engineering book, I will include
some references to these as well, should you want to learn more about them, at
the end of this chapter.
Now that we have a basic understanding of noise, let’s learn what the differences
are between error suppression, error mitigation, and error correction and how we
can use them to create useful quantum applications.
Differences between error
suppression, mitigation, and
correction
In the previous section, we discussed some sources of errors that can be
introduced to your quantum circuit when running them on a quantum system.
Here, we will define the various ways to eliminate these errors from your
quantum circuit to obtain optimal results. We’ll begin by first defining what the
differences between suppressing, mitigating, and correcting errors.

Error suppression is just as the name states, suppressing the noise of a given
circuit so that the quantum state remains intact. The specific noise here could be
either the decoherence time of a qubit (amplitude dampening) or dephasing. As
we learned earlier, if a qubit is placed in a specific state and left there over some
long period of time, that qubit will eventually return to the ground state, or some
state that is different from the set state. What we would like to do here is
suppress this by keeping the circuit in the current state. Of course, this is easier
said than done. Let’s first think about this intuitively, and then get into the
details.
Returning to our gym scenario from earlier, let’s now assume you are lifting a
very heavy set of weights over your chest from a laying position on the workout
bench, bench-pressing. There is a risk here that the weight, over time, starts to
feel heavier due to the strain your muscles are feeling. This is why you see most
people that do this have, standing very close to the weights, a spotter. This is
someone who helps you either when you are fatigued and need a little help, or
helps lift the weight off your chest when your muscles just suddenly give up.
There are many videos I’m sure you can find online where you can see the
terrible results when there’s no spotter around, but for now, let’s elaborate on
what this has to do with error suppression.
If you imagine that you need to sustain the weight over your head for a long
period of time, you’ll realize that over time your muscles will strain; we aligned
this to decoherence earlier. To help with this, your spotter can assist by gently
helping you raise the bar back up so you can maintain your initial position, or
state in this case. That assistance from your spotter can be seen as error
suppression in that it helped maintain your state while not changing the state
itself, meaning you’re not holding it any higher or lower than expected to count
as a lift. Now, let’s get out of the gym and switch our context back to quantum
and see how this helps us understand error suppression with respect to a
quantum circuit.

When a gate or set of gates is applied to a qubit within a circuit, that circuit may,
over some period of time, lose its state in many ways, some of which we
mentioned earlier. What we need to do is apply a technique in which we can help
the circuit maintain its state. Yes, this sounds like the definition of error
correction, but let me take a moment to elaborate on that to identify the
difference. To do that I’ll explain a new Pass (recall that a Pass is an object used
to optimize a circuit, such as finding an optimal layout mapping, or optimal
qubits) that was added to Qiskit called Dynamical Decoupling (DD).
Dynamical decoupling is a well-known technique that was described back in
1998 by Dr. Seth Lloyd and Dr. Lorenza Viola from MIT
(https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9803057 ). They describe it as a
form of using control pulses to minimize the diffusion of the state of the qubit.
This is generally done by applying the same gate operation twice, which mimics
an identity gate. We learned about this earlier when we explained that most
universal quantum gates are reversible, hence by applying two reversible gates
back-to-back, you end up with the identity gate. So, how does this work, you
ask? I’m glad you did, here we go!
If you recall from Chapter 7, Programming with Qiskit; Understanding pulses,
and Pulse Library section when we described that when running your circuit on
a quantum computer, you must first create a pulse schedule, which is what
dictates to the control systems the pulses to the qubits by following the pulse
schedule in order. You may also recall that the pulse schedule includes
information regarding the pulse, but also the duration of the pulse and the time
gaps in between pulses. Luckily for us, we learned that all of this is done for us
with the Transpiler and the PassManager. Once the pulse schedule is created
to run on the specific quantum system, the Dynamical Decoupling Pass takes a
run through it before running on the system. What the DD Pass looks for is idle
time gaps between pulse signals, and it inserts a sequence of gates into those
gaps. Remember that since the gates are reversible and we do not want to alter

the state or phase of the circuit, it will apply a pair of gates to ensure that it
sustains the action of a unitary gate. Let’s go to the code and see this in action to
get a better idea.
First, we’ll import some of the objects and functions we need to get started.
%run helper_file_1.0.ipynb
import numpy as np
from qiskit.circuit.library import XGate
from qiskit.transpiler import PassManager, Instru
ctionDurations
from qiskit.transpiler.passes import ALAPSchedule
Analysis, PadDynamicalDecoupling
from qiskit.visualization import timeline_drawer
Let’s go over what we are importing here. First, from the Transpiler, we’re
is what manages the Passes used to optimize our quantum circuits during
transpilation. InstructionDurations is basically just that; it stores the
durations of all the gates, timescales (dt), to the selected backend system. Let’s
pull the durations for a random backend system to try this out. Check which
backends are availale as the systems may change over time.
# Select a random backend you have access to, or
pick the least busy:
backend = service.get_backend('ibm_kyoto')
# Pull and print the duration times of the backen
d system for each get per qubit:
dur = InstructionDurations.from_backend(backend)
print(dur)

The following is a truncated example of the outputs, in this case the X gates.
Since ibm_kyoto is a 127-qubit device, we see that the durations shown are
indexed to identify the duration time for the x-gate and its corresponding qubit.
Note that the actual results will be a list of all gate durations between all qubits;
the following is just a subset of the results:
x(0,): 3.5555555555555554e-08 s
x(1,): 3.5555555555555554e-08 s
x(2,): 3.5555555555555554e-08 s
x(3,): 3.5555555555555554e-08 s
x(4,): 3.5555555555555554e-08 s
Qiskit also provides you with the ability to set the durations yourself for each
gate. This allows you to have a bit more control should you want to modify them
for specific devices. The following illustrates how to do this for all gates:
# Set the duration times for each gate.
custom_duration_times = InstructionDurations([('x'
, None, 100),
('h'
, 0, 100),
("c
x", [0, 1], 200),
("c
x", [1, 2], 200),
("c
x", [2, 3], 200),
("m
easure", None, 500
)])

# Print the timescales for each gate we set:
print(custom_duration_times)
Here, we have set the following custom duration times for each gate:
Gate Duration
x 100
h 100
cx[0,1] 200
cx[1,2] 200
cx[2,3] 200
measure 500
Table 10.1: Custom gate duration times
Next, we will visualize the circuit duration in a nice timeline. To visualize the
circuit and its timeline, we will need to transpile the circuit using a scheduling
method to a backend. A scheduling method is how the transpiler will
schedule the operations to the qubits, for example, as soon as possible when the
qubit is ready for the next instruction, or you can have it scheduled for later,
which basically keeps the qubit in the ground state when possible. For these
examples, we will use the alap scheduling method, which is an acronym for as
late as possible. You can find details about the various scheduling methods in the
Qiskit API documentation.

#Let's transpile the circuit and view the default
timeline
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, backend, scheduling
_method='alap',
layout_method='trivial')
timeline_drawer(transpiled_qc, time_range=[0,5500
], show_idle=False)
This will print out a visual representation of the gate duration. It will look very
much like the pulse schedule we learned about earlier; however, this is the circuit
and not the pulse schedule. You can tell because we see the qubit labels on the
left and not the drive
channels. Also note that CX gates have taken on the label of ecr in this case.
Figure 10.8: Circuit timeline visualization
As shown in Figure 10.8, this is the specified duration for each gate that is based
on the selected backend. We will use this duration to visualize some of the error
suppression features included in Qiskit, particularly Dynamical Decoupling.
The way Dynamical Decoupling works is that it will search for idle time in your
circuit and insert a sequence of Dynamical Decoupling gates to those idle time
slots to ensure that the qubit’s state is not altered. The pair of reversible gates
used will operate equally to that of an Identity gate so that it does not alter the
state of the circuit. Let’s use our custom duration times and a pair of X gates to

create the Dynamical Decoupling sequence of reversible gates.
# Create the Dynamical Decoupling sequence of rev
ersible gates, let's use XGates:
rev_gates = [XGate(), XGate()]
# Set the PassManager with the Dynamical Decoupli
ng sequence and custom duration times
pm = PassManager([ALAPScheduleAnalysis(custom_dur
ation_times),
PadDynamicalDecoupling(custom_d
uration_times, rev_gates)])
What we have defined is the pair of reversible gates that mimic an Identity gate.
In this case, we are using a pair of X gates. Then, we instantiated our
PassManager, which is what manages which Passes to use to optimize our
circuit during the transpilation phase. In this case, we are setting the alap
scheduling method and Dynamical Decoupling times to the custom duration
times we created earlier. Also included are the reversible gates as an argument to
the constructor.
Next, we want to run our transpiled circuit through the PassManager we just
created to produce the altered circuit with the Dynamical Decoupling included:
# Run the circuit through the PassManager to add
the DD to the circuit
qc_dynamical_decoupling = pm.run(transpiled_qc)
Now, let’s visualize this circuit and compare it to the previous circuit in Figure
10.9:
timeline_drawer(qc_dynamical_decoupling, show_idl

e=False)
This will draw the circuit with the error suppression of the Dynamical
Decoupling added. You can see the X gates that have been added to the first
qubit, q0.
Figure 10.9: Visualization of the Dynamical Decoupling circuit
Here, we can observe a couple of things. First, that the gate durations are smaller
due to the custom duration we set when compared to the previous circuit. Next,
you will also note that the inserted X gates were added to the first qubit only, and
not to the space after the second qubit, q1. This is because the idle time gap is
shorter than that of the two X gates, therefore the gate pairs were not added.
Let’s make a quick yet significant adjustment to the custom duration time to
include a pair of X gates after the second qubit by increasing the duration from
50 to 1500. Since we are only updating the value of one gate, we can just update
the value of the gate without restating the other gates by using the update()
function, as shown in the following code:
# Update durations
updated_values = [('x', None, 1500)]
updated_durations = custom_duration_times.update(
updated_values)
print(updated_durations)

Now, let’s retry and see what we get back this time. Here, we will set the
parameters with the updated values and rerun the PassManager and visualize
the results:
# Set the PassManager with the Dynamical Decoupli
ng sequence and custom duration times
pm = PassManager([ALAPScheduleAnalysis(updated_du
rations),
PadDynamicalDecoupling(updated_
durations, rev_gates)])
qc_dynamical_decoupling = pm.run(transpiled_qc)
timeline_drawer(qc_dynamical_decoupling, show_idl
e=False)
This will now produce two sets of reversible gates, one as before, and now a
second set, which we can see after the second qubit. Since we have reduced the
duration time, it can now fit in the idle time gap at the end of the second qubit, as
shown in the following diagram:
Figure 10.10: Visualization of circuit with updated duration times
As Figure 10.10 illustrates, we can set the duration time of each gate. In this
case, we increased the duration so we can see the changes. However, in many
cases you need to reduce it to try to squeeze in our reversible gates to fill in the
idle time gaps as needed. But, of course, like anything else, we do not

necessarily need to do all this fine tuning ourselves. Thankfully for us, the Qiskit
Runtime includes optimization and resilience levels that we can set to enable
these features for us, as described earlier in this chapter when we discussed the
various optimization levels we can set in the Options, which include enabling
Dynamical Decoupling.
Now that we have covered an example of error suppression, let’s continue and
look at error mitigation.
First, before we begin defining what error mitigation is, let me cover what
error correction is and how it is different. Error correction in general is
composed of two steps: first identifying that an error has occurred and second,
correcting that error using various error correcting techniques. Error mitigation
on the other hand uses the errors to calculate and determine an outcome that
reduces yet does not necessarily eliminate the error itself.
There are various error mitigating techniques, and much research is still ongoing
to find more optimal ways to reduce errors. At the time of writing, three
techniques are used to mitigate errors that are included into the Qiskit Runtime
resilience level options: TREX, ZNE, and PEC. Details regarding each are
linked earlier in this chapter, where we defined the resilience levels. Each of
these techniques uses classical resources to perform their tasks. This of course
introduces overhead into our application. However, there are advances released
regularly that reduce a lot of the overhead to optimize speed, quality, and
scalability. By continuing to do this we can surely over time reach a level of
quantum utility that will mean the cost to implement a complex quantum circuit
may be substantially lower than that of classical simulations.
Thankfully, again, Qiskit makes it easy for us to set the levels of error mitigation
using the resilience levels to activate specific error mitigation techniques. In the
following code snippet, we will run a circuit first without any error suppression
or mitigation techniques, and then we will create one that will use Dynamical

Decoupling for error suppression and TREX for error mitigation.
We’ll start with no error suppression or mitigation:
least_busy_backend = service.least_busy(simulator=
False, operational=True,
min_num_qubits=transpile
d_qc.num_qubits)
# Let's transpile the circuit to this new backend:
transpiled_qc=transpile(qc, backend=least_busy_ba
ckend)
options = Options()
options.execution.shots = 1000
options.optimization_level = 0 # No error suppre
ssion
options.resilience_level = 0 # No error mitigati
on
with Session(service=service, backend=least_busy_
backend) as session:
sampler = Sampler(session=session, options=op
tions)
job_sim_0 = sampler.run(transpiled_qc)
print(job_sim_0.result())
session.close()
plot_distribution(job_sim_0.result().quasi_dists)
The results are as follows when running the Sampler, and you should see a visual
representation of the results as well:
SamplerResult(quasi_dists=[{0: 0.463, 1: 0.011, 2
: 0.006, 3: 0.008, 4: 0.008, 6: 0.001, 7: 0.009, 8

: 0.01, 9: 0.001, 10: 0.008, 11: 0.01, 12: 0.006,
13: 0.014, 14: 0.099, 15: 0.346}], metadata=[{'sh
ots': 1000}])
Next, we will enable both Dynamical Decoupling and TREX:
options.execution.shots = 1000
options.optimization_level = 3 # Levels 1-3 use
Dynamical Decoupling
options.resilience_level = 1 # Level 1 uses TREX
for error mitigation
with Session(service=service, backend=least_busy_
backend) as session:
sampler = Sampler(session=session, options=op
tions)
job_sim_1 = sampler.run(transpiled_qc)
print(job_sim_1.result())
session.close()
plot_distribution(job_sim_1.result().quasi_dists)
Here, we set the optimization_level to 3, which will enable Dynamical
Decoupling, and the resilience_level to 1, which uses TREX for error
mitigation. Note the difference in the results are much more refined and the
metadata includes the added overhead and mitigation time:
SamplerResult(quasi_dists=[{0: 0.4741007821539706
, 1: -0.00328801216329741, 2: -0.0069898534104091
16, 3: 0.0018169643386157586, 4: -0.0050964778858
81826, 5: 0.00010104383589854057, 6: 0.0016676295
409465852, 7: 0.0017229622606998135, 8: 0.0038884

349758400295, 11: -0.0025386992448873155, 12: 0.0
014124334608473367, 13: 0.0009761688074426505, 14
: 3.0231076968467426e-05, 15: 0.5321963922532457}
], metadata=[{'shots': 1000, 'readout_mitigation_
overhead': 1.6922534955446735, 'readout_mitigatio
n_time': 0.059042368084192276}])
This and many other error suppression and mitigation methods are increasing in
popularity among researchers as they try to understand the effects of noise and
determine optimal ways to mitigate against them in the hopes of accelerating our
path from quantum utility towards quantum advantage.
Summary
In this chapter, we covered some of the many effects that noise has on a quantum
computing system, both specific to the qubit and externally with respect to the
quantum system itself via readout errors. We discovered how we can use the
Qiskit Runtime service to run our circuits using the fundamental building blocks
known as Primitives. Finally, we learned how to apply error suppression and
mitigation techniques to our quantum circuits so to filter the noisy results from a
quantum device, which significantly reduces errors and provides more accurate
results to complex quantum circuits.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to create quantum applications using the
many features available in Qiskit. We will look at creating quantum algorithms,
and ultimately provide you with all the tools you need to create your own
quantum algorithms and quantum applications.
Questions
1. List the three main error mitigation techniques used by the Qiskit Runtime

service.
2. Which resilience levels are used for error mitigation?
3. What other reversible gates could you use to fill in the idle time of a qubit
using Dynamical Decoupling?
4. Which type of noise contributes to amplitude dampening of a qubit?
5. Which type of noises contribute to dephasing of a qubit?
Further reading
IBM Quantum Learning platform:
https://learning.quantum.ibm.com
Evidence for the utility of quantum computing before fault tolerance:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-06096-3
Quasi-probability decompositions with reduced sampling overhead:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41534-022-00517-3
Dynamical suppression of decoherence in two-state quantum systems:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/9803057.pdf
Error mitigation in short depth circuits:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1612.02058.pdf
Sutor, B., Dancing with Qubits, Packt Publishing:
https://www.packtpub.com/data/dancing-with-qubits
Nielsen, M. & Chuang, I., Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information, Cambridge University Press:
https://www.cambridge.org/us/academic/subjects/phy
sics/quantum-physics-quantum-information-andquantum-computation/quantum-computation-andquantum-information-10th-anniversary-edition
Wootton, J., What is Quantum Error Correction?, Medium Series:
https://decodoku.medium.com/1-what-is-quantum-

error-correction-4ab6d97cb398
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

11
Understanding Quantum
Algorithms
If you’ve been reading the news about quantum computing, you will have
noticed many articles from various companies, both large and small, all working
on different projects related to quantum computing. The reason is largely based
on the potential computing power that quantum systems offer when compared to
classical systems. The potential to provide speedup, quality, and scalability are
the main areas of interest that most companies and research institutions are
looking heavily into now.
By grasping the intricacies of the various quantum algorithms and learning how
to apply them to a specific problem set or industry, researchers and developers
can then look at extending what they learned about the small problems and apply
them to large real-world enterprise solutions. This era of solving real-world
problems using quantum computers that are intractable to classic computers is
referred to as quantum advantage. Currently, most of the work being done
centers on understanding and creating quantum computation algorithms, which
are usually focused on smaller toy problems, as they are commonly referred to.
However, in 2021, IBM Quantum introduced a 127-qubit processor that broke
the 100-qubit barrier. This signifies a great move forward as it represents a
barrier in which classical simulations may no longer mimic a quantum computer
of equal size. Early evidence of this was found in 2023 when a 127-qubit Eagle
processor was able to perform exact solutions to computational problems beyond

classical brute force. Details about this can be found in the Nature article
Evidence for the utility of quantum computing before fault tolerance
(https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-06096-3 ).
This brings us a step closer to the quantum advantage phase that everyone is
racing to achieve. Of course, this will vary as some problems might require more
quantum computational power than others, but, over time, different industries
will eventually achieve it soon enough. To get yourselves suited up and in the
race, you’ll need to understand some of the foundational quantum algorithms
and how they are applied to solve general problems.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Understanding the meaning of outperforming classical systems
Learning about the Deutsch algorithm
Understanding the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm
Learning about the foundational oracle-based quantum algorithm
In this chapter, we will review the various quantum algorithms in use today. One
of the most difficult hurdles to overcome while learning about quantum
algorithms is that it is not a lift and shift from classical to quantum. Simply
implementing a classical algorithm’s steps from a classic system onto a quantum
system, such as a simple adder, will not automatically make it a quantum
speedup algorithm. There’s a bit more to it than that.
In Chapter 5, Understanding the Qubit, we discussed how quantum states are
manipulated, and in Chapter 7, Programming with Qiskit, we covered how to
run a circuit on a quantum system. We will now put all those pieces together to
learn about and create quantum algorithms and illustrate how they can
outperform classical algorithms in this chapter. We will begin by providing an
example of a quantum algorithm that is foundational and illustrate how quantum
systems perform operations much faster by reviewing both the Deutsch and
Deutsch-Jozsa algorithms. We’ll follow that up with more generalized

algorithms that focus on solving simple problems with the Bernstein-Vazirani
algorithm.
This is by no means an exhaustive list of quantum algorithms, but this chapter
will provide you with the early foundational algorithms that will help you
understand the advanced algorithms and how they compare to classical
algorithms. Should you want to see a more complete algorithm list, refer to
Appendix A, Resources, for some links to sites that keep track of quantum
algorithms and research. Of course, as the technology and algorithms advance,
new algorithms will be discovered that may have different methods than the
following, but in all of these, it is ideal to understand the basics to get you up
and running without having to delve too deep into the physics.
Technical requirements
In this chapter, it is expected that you have a basic understanding of linear
algebra to understand the equations of each algorithm. You should also have
some experience in programming basic circuits and executing them on your
local simulator and a quantum device available on the IBM Quantum platform.
Finally, you should be familiar with both classical bit notation and logic,
quantum Dirac notation (or Bra-Ket notation), and understand the basic
quantum computing principles such as superposition, entanglement, and
interference that were covered in the previous chapters.
Here is the full source code used throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
Understanding the meaning of
outperforming classical

systems
In this section, we will learn about the potential advantages that a quantum
system has over classical systems by studying some of the early examples that
illustrate quantum speedup versus classical systems, albeit some of the examples
are simple illustrations of the advantages that, in themselves, do not have any
practical usage.
Claims such as quantum systems potentially solving equations at rapid speeds
over classical systems or having the capability of a larger computation space all
sound fascinating. However, recall that, at the time of writing this chapter, there
are still no quantum systems available that can outperform current classical
systems in solving real-world commercial problems. “So why all the chatter?”
you ask.
The answer is simple—potential. Theoretically speaking, there are quantum
algorithms that describe solutions to problems that illustrate quantum speedup,
such as Shor’s algorithm. However, it is expected that we will see quantum
advantage before we will see quantum breaks in encryption. This is because
reaching quantum advantage is based on a specific problem. It will not be
specific data for all; it will evolve as the technology is able to compute very
large and complex circuits. To implement complex circuits or algorithms, we
will require systems that contain error mitigation, suppression, and, eventually,
correction in order to obtain accurate results. This, of course, could be similar to
most new technologies. A good example of this is video streaming.
Multimedia compression has been around for decades, with video streaming
invented in the early 1990s. When video compression was first made
commercially available, internet bandwidth had increased and was more widely
available, albeit the quality of the video and the audio was not as rich as it is
today; the resolution was around 150 x 76 pixels, with a refresh rate of around
8–12 frames per second with poor audio quality. The limitation back then was

both the compression technique to decrease the quality of the multimedia and the
bandwidth to stream the multimedia content to multiple viewers simultaneously.
The infrastructure to ensure proper decompression and minimize information
loss was dependent on error correction, and a proper protocol to avoid lowquality and often jittery resolution. Now, of course, just a little over two decades
later, we can see the progress: we can stream live multimedia events with low
errors and high resolution. Streaming to your home theater system with a large
4K high-definition screen where you don’t have to worry too much about the
quality of the video is something of a norm nowadays.
Quantum systems share this same roadmap, where we have the hardware
(quantum systems) and the algorithms to do things at a medium resolution now.
The difference here is that we have something we did not have back then: a
global infrastructure in which anyone, anywhere, has access to a quantum
system via the cloud. IBM quantum computers are available for anyone to access
by simply registering for a free account.
In the early days of video streaming, very few had access to bandwidth. Those
who did were limited by the infrastructure to collaborate. By having cloudaccessible systems, many industries and academic institutions are doing more
research on quantum hardware and algorithms. Of course, back in the early days
of multimedia streaming, the solutions being solved were classified as toy
problems. However, don’t let the name fool you. These toy problems are far
from just something to play with and show off to your colleagues. They are the
stepping stones to real-world solutions.
For example, if you find a solution that illustrates quantum speedup vis-à-vis
classical, with just a handful of qubits and very little quantum volume, then that
might not be useful for solving many of today’s commercial or real-world
problems.
What it does provide is the foundational information needed to scale your

solution to a system with the necessary quantum volume to solve a real-world
problem. To understand what that roadmap to quantum advantage is, where a
quantum solution exists that can outperform a classical system in solving a realworld problem, it’s important to first understand the foundational quantum
algorithms and how they not only differ from classical algorithms but also
provide an advantage over them. This will simplify your understanding of other,
more complex algorithms and how they are used to solve problems in various
industries.
In the next section, we will discuss the various types of foundational quantum
algorithms, starting with the original algorithms that demonstrate an advantage
over classical systems.
Learning about Deutsch’s
algorithm
David Deutsch, a physicist at the University of Oxford, first discovered a
problem that could be solved by a quantum computer faster than a classical
computer. The problem itself has no importance or use in any computer
problems, but it did serve to illustrate the advantage that quantum computation
has over classical computation. Let’s understand that problem in the next
section.
Understanding the problem
The problem is very simple. We’ll use a simple analogy to explain it. Imagine
someone is hiding a coin in each hand. Each coin, when revealed, will either be
heads or tails. Since there are two coins, one in each hand, there are four possible
results, as shown in the following table:
Events Left hand Right hand

1 Heads Heads
2 Heads Tails
3 Tails Heads
4 Tails Tails
Table 11.1: All four possible outcomes
From the preceding list of events, we can see there are two categories. The first
and fourth events are an example of a constant outcome, where both the left and
right produce the same result of either heads or tails. The second and third events
are examples of balanced outcomes.
Here, the event results are the opposite of one another, indicating that if one is
heads, then the other will be tails, or vice versa. Using this same analogy, if I
were to reveal one hand at a time, let’s say the left hand, then by just viewing the
results of the left hand, you would not have enough information to determine
whether the result will be constant or balanced because you still need to know
what is in the other hand.
Now, imagine there were 100 hands in front of you and you had to examine each
hand one at a time in order to determine if there are a balanced number of heads
and tails, or if all of the hands contain only heads or only tails. In the best-case
scenario, you would get it on the first two tries, meaning if the first hand had
heads and the second had tails, you can conclude that the results of the other
hands will be balanced. On the other hand (pun intended), if the first two hands
revealed the same, either heads or tails, then you cannot conclude that it is
balanced or constant.
You would have to, in a worst-case scenario, continue until the 51st hand is

revealed, because if the first 50 hands are heads, then the 51st would indicate
whether the whole set is constant (if the 51st is heads) or balanced (if the 51st is
tails). However, we are jumping ahead a little bit, so let’s stick to the current
scope of the problem of just two events.
Using a quantum algorithm, which is what Deutsch proposed here, to solve this
problem is the same as opening all the hands at once and determining whether
the first two qubits are constant or balanced. Interesting, isn’t it? Let’s see how
this works!
We’ll begin by migrating the analogy of the problem to a mathematical equation.
This will simplify the description of the solution later:
1. First, substitute heads and tails with binary notations of 0 and 1,
respectively.
2. Next, we’ll refer to the result of each hand as a function , where the
argument can refer to left or right, or , respectively.
Therefore, the results are as follows. In this case, the function is , where
the argument x can be either a 0 or 1 (left or right). The results represent each of
the events that have a different result, where each one is either balanced or
constant:
Events Results
1 0 0 Constant
2 0 1 Balanced
3 1 0 Balanced
4 1 1 Constant

Table 11.2: Mathematical representation of outcomes
As you can see from the preceding table, now we can restate our problem as a
function that maps a single bit {0,1} to a result of either {0,1}, the results of
which would be constant if the results for both and are the same,
such as Event 1 and Event 4 (from the preceding table), or the results would be
balanced otherwise. Now that we understand the problem, let’s figure out the
solution.
Defining the problem
We now know that if = , then we say is constant; otherwise, is
balanced. The problem becomes interesting if we were to introduce a black box,
sometimes referred to as an oracle, that is hidden from us. We don’t know
whether the function, hidden in the black box, is either constant or balanced,
which is the problem we are asked to solve. The following diagram is a graphical
example of our input value, x, going into the black box function, , and
outputting the result value, :
Figure 11.1: Black box representation of our problem
As you can see in the preceding diagram, this problem can be solved classically.

However, it will need to have two queries to determine whether is constant or
balanced, where each query would view the results of both and to
conclude whether it is constant or balanced. When using Deutsch’s quantum
algorithm, we will see whether we can determine using just one query that
leverages the superposition principle. Let’s see how in the next section.
Describing the problem as a quantum
problem
Since we are working with quantum computations, we’ll have to first switch to
representing our functions and values using vectors. Therefore, our constant
function, where both inputs result in the same output, can be represented in
vector form as follows:
The results of this function with a different input having the same result can be
represented as follows:
The function can therefore be represented by the following matrix:
Equally, the following is an example of a balanced function, where the results
are the opposites of the two input values:
will be our black box, or oracle function. To do this, we will need to extend

our previous diagram to include the extra components necessary to create our
oracle:
1. First, we will convert our input and output registers into Dirac ket notation,
.
2. Next, we will create two input registers, and , where the input
registers will feed into our black box, or oracle function, , and the
register is used as an ancillary qubit. Ancilla qubits are extra bits used to
store information that might be used later or to track information
throughout the quantum circuit.
3. Finally, we’ll define our two output registers: one that is just the same as the
input , and the other that is the XOR of the input register x and the input
register x XORed with the function , as .
Therefore, we can now define the oracle function as follows:
This is illustrated as follows:
Figure 11.2: Graphical representation of the Deutsch algorithm
Another requirement is that the function should be reversible and we can test to
see if it is by working it out in reverse:

Now that we have our function defined as a quantum function for our problem,
we’ll see how Deutsch’s algorithm works.
Implementing Deutsch’s algorithm
In this section, we will implement the algorithm with a balanced function as an
example but will leave it to you to update the code to implement a constant
function. We’ll examine the Deutsch algorithm and step through each task as we
build the algorithm on the IQL as follows:
1. Open a new Jupyter notebook where you have Qiskit installed, and in the
first cell, include the helper file:
%run helper_file_1.0.ipynb
2. Next, we will create a 2-qubit circuit and prepare each input, the first to
and the second to . We will use the identity gate to represent the ,
which is the initial state, and an X-gate to represent the initial state of :
# Implement Deutsch's algorithm for a bala
nced function
qc = QuantumCircuit(2,1)
# Prepare the input qubits, where q0=0, q1
=1
print('Step 1: Prepare the input qubits, w
here q0=0, q1=1')
qc.id(0)
qc.x(1)
qc.barrier()
qc.draw(output='mpl')

This results in the following circuit diagram:
Figure 11.3: Initializing the qubits to 0 and 1
As you can see from the preceding diagram, q0 is set to and q1 is set to
, which creates the first state at the barrier ( ) as . The use of the
barrier is just to indicate checkpoints as we traverse through each
operation in the circuit.
3. Now that our inputs are set, we will place them in a superposition state
using Hadamard gates. This will allow us to iterate through once while
leveraging all four states, rather than iterating through each of them one at a
time:
# Place each qubit in superposition by app
lying a
# Hadamard
print('Step 2: Place each qubit in superpo
sition by applying a Hadamard')
qc.h(0)
qc.h(1)
qc.barrier()
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The result of the preceding code is illustrated in the following diagram.

The barriers are used to separate each step so as to simplify reading the
circuit:
Figure 11.4: Applying Hadamard gates to both qubits
As you can see from the preceding diagram, the Hadamard gate transforms
the basis vectors for each qubit as follows:
This generates the following state at the second barrier as , where
describes a single qubit:
4. After the qubits have applied the preceding Hadamard gates, the resulting
value for the quantum registers will be as follows:
One thing to note here is that we now have the second qubit in a
superposition, . This allows us to define the first and second qubit out
of , as follows:
From the preceding equation, you can see that the second qubit, grouped

in the second set of parentheses, has the same value, which is the
superposition, .
However, the first qubit we see has an interesting result. Let’s dig a little
deeper to understand what this means.
Here, we see that if is constant, we’ll have the following:
If is balanced, then we’ll have the following:
Note that the second qubit is always the same, but the first has a phase
kickback from positive if constant, and negative if balanced. This phase
kickback is a common trick used in many quantum algorithms, so rest
assured we will see this again.
5. Next, by applying a Hadamard gate to the first qubit, we can see something
interesting as a result. Let’s look at this one at a time.
For a constant function, the first qubit is set to the following:
We recall that applying a Hadamard gate to this superposition state will
return us to the state.
For the balanced function, the first qubit is set to the following
superposition state:

We can also recall that applying a Hadamard gate to the previous
superposition state will return us to the state.
This means that measuring only the first qubit after applying a Hadamard
gate to it will provide us with a resulting state of either or , constant
or balanced, respectively.
6. Let’s implement this using our Qiskit notebook.
This is where we wish to set a quantum gate that would operate on q1,
which represents the y value, based on the value of q0, which represents
the x value. Therefore, this operator, which we’ll call , will have inputs
(x, y). The gate we will use to represent this will be a Control-Not
(CNOT) gate. The reason for using this for the balanced function is
because it produces the Bell states 01 and 10 with the input qubits. And, of
course, this could be switched to the other two Bell states, 00 and 11, by
adding an X gate, which would make this a constant function.
In this case, we are working to create a balanced function, one to one,
which equates to the following:
To accomplish this, we will need to define our state operator, , as
follows:
Now, we will place a CNOT gate with the control on the first qubit, q0,
and the target on the second qubit, q1:
# Add a CNOT gate with the Control on q0 and

Target on q1
qc.cx(0,1)
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
This should now include the CNOT gate that generates the function type
(balanced) and renders the following diagram:
Figure 11.5: Defining the function type (balanced)
7. Next, we’ll add Hadamard gates to all qubits and a measurement operator to
the first qubit:
# Add the Hadamard gates to all qubits
qc.h(0)
qc.h(1)
qc.barrier()
As we saw in our equation earlier, we only need to apply a Hadamard gate
to the first qubit, as we will only be measuring the one qubit:

Figure 11.6: Applying the Hadamard gate to the qubits before measuring
This results in the following state, :
Let’s now apply some algebra to simplify our results:
Since we will only be measuring the first qubit, we can throw the second
qubit away or just not measure it as it is just an ancillary qubit in this case.
8. Let’s take a measurement of the first qubit, shown as follows, the result of
which will determine the category of the function as either balanced (1) or
constant (0):
# Add measurement operator to the first qu
bit
qc.measure(0,0)

We already know from the previous equation that this should equate to a
balanced function:
Figure 11.7: Applying the measurement operator to just the first qubit
9. Next, to simplify a few things, let’s define a function to run our circuits on a
Sampler installed on your local machine. We’ll use the following function,
which leverages the StatevectorSampler:
# Run on a Sampler
def run_on_sampler(circuit):
from qiskit.primitives import Statevec
torSampler
# Construct a Statevector Sampler
sampler = StatevectorSampler()
# Run using the Sampler
result = sampler.run([circuit]).result
()
return result
10. Now we can run the preceding circuit and verify our results by using the
following code:
# Execute the quantum circuit on the simul
ator first to
# confirm our results.

print('Step 6: Execute the circuit to view
results.')
result = run_on_sampler(qc)
counts = result[0].data.c.get_counts()
# Print and plot our results
print(counts)
plot_distribution(counts, title='Balanced
function')
As calculated previously, the results of this experiment indicate a balanced
function, as indicated by the result 1, rather than 0.
This results in the following output:
Figure 11.8: Result of value 1, indicating a balanced function
As expected, we see that our result is 1, indicating a balanced function.
Observe that to retrieve the counts from the results, we need to map to the data

object and then to the name of the classical register that we wish to extract the
counts from.
From the preceding output, the result shows the same as what we expected for
the given function we provided, which, in this case, is the balanced function,
where 1 has a higher probability. There is an exercise in the Questions section
where you are required to create a constant function.
What we have shown here is the potential of a quantum algorithm to perform
operations faster than a classical system, which would otherwise need to
calculate each function in series for each input. Naturally, this exercise does not
offer any real-world applications, but it does help in understanding how these
systems have potential speedup properties. In the next section, we will look at
generalizing this example by applying it to more than one qubit.
Understanding the Deutsch-Jozsa
algorithm
In the previous section, the Deutsch algorithm provided us with an example of
quantum speedup where we use two qubits but only measure one qubit. Here, the
Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm provides a more generalized form of the algorithm. It
can be applied to more than one qubit. Originally proposed by David Deutsch
and Richard Jozsa in 1992, with improvements by Richard Cleve, Artur Ekert,
Chiara Macchiavello, and Michele Mosca in 1998, the problem is still the same,
but as we mentioned at the end of the previous section, the problem is now
extended to more than just a single qubit. The Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm will
operate on multiple qubits at once, and, of course, will still provide a quantum
speedup compared with classical computing as it would need to calculate each
event in series, as we will see in the next section.
Understanding the Deutsch-Jozsa

problem
In this example, we will extend the previous definition of the problem.
Previously, we defined our problem on a single-bit value function to determine
whether a function was constant or balanced, as follows:
In this case, we will expand the problem to include more than one bit as an input,
such that:
You can see from the preceding equation that is constant if is the same
for all, that is, . Otherwise, is balanced if for half of x,
and for the other half of x. For example, if we set n equal to 2 in our
input values, , then this will result in four different input values, that is,
00, 01, 10, and 11.
Based on these four possible input values of x, to create a balanced function, we
can set the first half of the results to 0, such that:
Input 1 Input 2 Output
0 0 0
0 1 0
We can set the second half of the results to 1:
Input 1 Input 2 Output
1 0 1

1 1 1
If we were to solve this classically, we would need queries to
determine whether the results are constant or balanced. On the other hand, the
Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm will only require one query in order to determine
whether the function is constant or balanced, just as in the Deutsch algorithm.
Generating a quantum solution using
the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm
To generate our quantum circuit to implement the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm, we
will use some of the same components as before:
1. Let’s start with our inputs to our black box (oracle). The first input register
is an n-bit string representing the input X. We denote this with a capital X,
as most texts refer to single qubit or bit values with a lowercase variable
such as , whereas multi-qubits are represented by uppercase variables
such as .
The second input register is a single-bit string representing the input y,
which, as before, is initialized to 1. This is commonly referred to as an
ancilla qubit.
2. Next, we define the function of the oracle similar to how we did in the
previous form. However, the difference here is that is now a multi-qubit
input, . is then defined as follows:
So, our output would similarly map to two outputs. The first is the same as
the first input , and the second output is our function . This
results in the following graphical representation:

Figure 11.9: Graphical representation of the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm
Now that we have defined our components, let’s implement this block digram as
a circuit in the next section.
Implementing the Deutsch-Jozsa
algorithm
In this example we will implement the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm to determine
that a given function is constant in one query, whereas determining the same on a
classical system will require multiple queries, therefore illustrating how using
quantum computing can provide a speedup.
In order to implement the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm, create a new Qiskit
notebook and run the boilerplate cell to load up all our Qiskit modules. Once the
setup is complete, let’s create our circuit step by step and see how it resolves our
problem as we go:
1. First, let’s set our input values. We will start by creating a quantum circuit
with two inputs, the first set to X, which we will create as a 4-qubit input,
followed by a single qubit representing y, which we will initialize to 1.
Then we will apply a Hadamard gate to all the input qubits:
# Create the quantum circuit with both inp

ut registers X,
# and y
input_qubits = 4 # Refers to our X input
register,
#4-qubits
ancilla_qubit = 1 # Refers to our y input
register,
#1--qubit
# Total qubits in our quantum circuit
total_qubits = input_qubits + ancilla_qubi
t
# Generate the circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(total_qubits, input_qu
bits)
# Set the X qubits in superposition
for idx in range(input_qubits):
qc.h(idx)
# Set the y qubit to 1, then apply a Hadam
ard
qc.x(input_qubits)
qc.h(input_qubits)
qc.barrier()
qc.draw(output='mpl')
This will result in the following diagram:

Figure 11.10: Preparing the input values of our quantum circuit
The input state results in the following:
When we apply a Hadamard gate to the preceding equation, it breaks out
into the following:
When we apply a Hadamard gate to the single qubit , this gives us the
following equation:
Simplifying both and gives us the following equation:

2. Next, we will create the oracle function for our circuit similar to how we
created it in the previous section on the Deutsch algorithm. We will use the
same here, only this time, we have the ket X, which is more than a single
bit of information:
The value of x is the bit representation of the bit string X of 0 or 1.
3. Let’s now set our input state using a bit string to represent the balanced
function—in this case, '1010', which we construct by placing an X gate
with the set bits and Identity gates with the others. This will allow us to
determine whether the input is balanced or constant—in this case, since we
have an equal number of 1s and 0s, it is balanced. You can also just not add
an Identity gate, but for now, we will add one just to visually indicate the 0
values of the bit string:
# Set the bit string which we wish to eval
uate,
# in this case set '1010', where I indicat
es value 0,
# and x indicates value 1.
qc.id(0)
qc.x(1)
qc.id(2)
qc.x(3)
qc.barrier()
qc.draw(output='mpl')

This will render the following addition to our circuit, where the added
section represents setting the input state based on the bit string
1010:
Figure 11.11: State representation of the bit string 1010
4. Next, we will apply our oracle. In this case, we will set it to a constant
output where all outputs should be 1s, with zero probability of 0s. We’ll do
so by adding CNOT gates, where the Control is applied to each qubit and
the Target is set to the last qubit:
# Set oracle to either constant (output =
0s)
# or balanced (output = 1s)
# In this example we will choose a balance
d function
for idx in range(input_qubits):
qc.cx(idx, input_qubits)
qc.barrier()

qc.draw(output='mpl')
The result of this should be as follows, where we set each Control of the
CNOT gate to all qubits and the Target to our ancilla qubit, q4:
Figure 11.12: Representation of the added balanced oracle
5. Next, we will set the closing bit string, which we use to wrap our oracle—in
this case, '1010':
# Set the closing bit string we selected e
arlier to
# evaluate
qc.id(0)
qc.x(1)
qc.id(2)
qc.x(3)
qc.barrier()
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The preceding code will give us the following diagram, just as we

expected, where the oracle is bound by the bit string:
Figure 11.13: Oracle bounded by the bit string representation
6. Next, we will apply the Hadamard gates to all the qubits:
# Add the Hadamard gates to complete wrapp
ing the oracle
for idx in range(4):
qc.h(idx)
qc.barrier()
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The result of this is rendered as follows:
Figure 11.14: A complete quantum circuit of the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm for a balanced function

7. Finally, we will add our measurements so that we can read out the results.
We will apply the measurements only to the first four qubits:
# Add measurements only to our inputs
qc.measure(range(4),range(4))
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
Therefore, our final quantum circuit should be as follows. Each step in
creating the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm is separated by the barriers, where
the first is the preparation, the second is to set the bit string 1010, the
third is to set our oracle , and then we reverse the first two steps,
followed by our measurements:
Figure 11.15: Final circuit for the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm
8. Now that we have created our quantum circuit for the Deutsch-Jozsa
algorithm, let’s execute the circuit on a simulator first to visualize what
results we get back:
# Run the circuit
result = run_on_sampler(qc)
counts = result[0].data.c.get_counts()
# Print and plot results
print(counts)

plot_distribution(counts)
As expected, our results returned a probability of 100% of 1s for a
balanced circuit:
Figure 11.16: Results from the simulator of a balanced function
As expected, we see that we have a high quasi-probability of 1111. This was
computed using a single query, as opposed to the multiple queries that we would
have needed to compute the same thing classically.
Now that we have completed both the Deutsch and Deutsch-Jozsa algorithms,
we can see that there is some speedup when compared to classical systems.
However, we can also see that there are no practical or real-world examples
where we can apply these algorithms. That said, we have understood how the use
of superposition and entanglement can speed up certain functions compared to
classical techniques. We’ll expand our understanding of algorithms into

something that is a bit more of a generalized quantum algorithm, namely,
Bernstein-Vazirani, in the next section.
Learning about the
foundational oracle-based
quantum algorithm
We learned in the previous section that the very early quantum algorithms
illustrated quantum speedup vis-à-vis classical systems in relation to a simple
problem. In this section, we will expand on this to look at a more complex
problem. To do this, we will learn about another oracle-based algorithm,
Bernstein-Vazirani. The difference between this one and the previous
foundational algorithms is that the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm will identify a
hidden bit string using an oracle function in a single query.
Learning about the BernsteinVazirani algorithm
Originally invented in 1992 by Ethan Bernstein and Umesh Vazirani, the
Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm extends the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm to a
generalization to find an unknown or secret bit string. Where the Deutsch-Jozsa
algorithm worked to solve the problem of determining whether a given function
is constant or balanced, the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm works to determine a
secret number by applying a function that maps an input to its output.
Understanding the Bernstein-Vazirani
problem
The problem that the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm addresses is straightforward

and similar to the previous problem. Given an unknown function, or black box
(oracle), similar to the Deutsch-Jozsa oracle, an input string of bits results in an
output of either 0 or 1. A simple example could be a logical expression that maps
the input values to a single output value of either 0 or 1:
For this function , we are guaranteed that the following applies:
From the preceding equation, s is an unknown or secret string such that:
The problem, therefore, is to find the secret value s.
Solving this classically is the same as the previous examples, where we would
have to check each value one bit at a time to determine the secret value, s.
However, as we have seen in the previous examples, we can solve this with a
quantum algorithm executing a single query. Let’s walk through the example to
see how we can solve this using the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm.
Generating a quantum solution using
the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm
The Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm is very similar to Deutsch-Jozsa in that it
performs the same steps to create the quantum circuit for the algorithm:
1. Initialize all n input qubits to the ground state .
2. Initialize the ancilla qubit to the excited state .
3. Apply a Hadamard gate to all input qubits and the ancilla qubit,
.
4. Query the oracle to apply a phase change based on the secret string value
using CNOT gates.

5. Apply another set of Hadamard gates to the input qubits.
6. Measure the input qubits to obtain the secret string.
As you can see from the preceding steps, the algorithm is very similar. However,
the main differentiator here is steps 4 and 5. When a qubit hits the secret key, we
then apply a phase shift, that is, when , where si is the ith term of the secret
string. Then, in step 5, when we apply the second set of Hadamard gates, the
qubit will return from to if , or from to if .
Let’s implement these steps one at a time and review the changes to the state. As
before, we will use barriers to separate each step so that we can visualize each
step along the way.
Implementing the Bernstein-Vazirani
algorithm
The following steps are a step-by-step guide to creating the Bernstein-Vazirani
algorithm and describe the outcome of each step to help you understand how
each step affects the state, which will eventually produce the secret string:
1. Start by creating a new Qiskit notebook with the usual boilerplate cell that
will load much of the base Qiskit modules and our account, so that we can
execute the quantum circuit on an actual quantum computer.
First, we will create our quantum circuit, which will be made up of four
qubits, and one ancilla qubit, and we will define our secret bit string
(shh):
# Create your secret number
shh = '1010'
# Set the number of qubits to represent secre
t number and
# an ancilla qubit

input_qubits = len(shh)
ancilla_qubit = 1
total_qubits = input_qubits + ancilla_qubit
# Create the quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(total_qubits, input_qubit
s)
The preceding code creates our base quantum circuit, qc, which we will
use to construct the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm. The input qubits must
be at least the length of our secret string, which, in this case, is the value
1010. Our input register will need to be at least this many qubits in
length. We then added an ancilla qubit, which, in the previous examples,
we referred to as the output qubit. Moving forward, we will start referring
to this qubit as an ancilla qubit in that it is more of a utility qubit that will
not be measured or output to our results.
2. Next, we will add Hadamard gates to the input qubits to ensure that all
input qubits are set to a superposition state:
# Add Hadamard gates to the input qubits
for idx in range(input_qubits):
qc.h(idx)
# Draw the input circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
This will render our quantum circuit as follows:

Figure 11.17: Initializing the input qubits’ state from to a superposition state,
3. Next, we will need to prepare our ancilla qubit, q4, just as we did before, by
first initializing it to the state , followed by a Hadamard gate, which will
prepare the state of the ancilla qubit to :
# Prepare the ancilla qubit of the circuit
qc.x(total_qubits-1)
qc.h(total_qubits-1)
qc.barrier()
# Draw the prepared circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The preceding code will render the following circuit, which we see is the
same initialization of our circuit as before. This is how most quantum
algorithms are initialized, which allows working with all possible

combinations of qubit states. The barrier is added simply to view the
various state changes:
Figure 11.18: Initialization of all qubits
The state at the first barrier is now set to the following, where the input
qubits are as follows:
The ancilla qubit is set to:
4. Next, we need to make a quick bit order adjustment before we apply our
oracle function. Since the qubits are ordered from right to left, we will need
to reverse the order of our secret number:

# Before creating the oracle, we need to a
djust the
# qubits. Since they are ordered from left
to right,
# we will reverse the secret number's curr
ent value
print('Secret before reverse: ', shh)
# Reverse order
shh = shh[::-1]
print('Secret after reverse: ', shh)
As you can see from the following output, the order is now 0101, so we
can now apply our oracle function:
Secret before reverse: 1010
Secret after reverse: 0101
5. To apply the oracle function, we want to trigger a phase shift each time we
hit a '1' in the secret string. To do that, we will apply a CNOT gate to
each qubit, where the Control is set to each qubit and the Target is linked to
the ancilla. In our case, the secret string has '1' set on qubit 1 (q1) and
qubit 3 (q3):
# Now that we have the right order,
# let's create the oracle by applying a CN
OT,
# where the qubits set to '1' are the sour
ce
# and the target would be the ancilla qubit
for idx in range(input_qubits):

if shh[idx] == '1':
qc.cx(idx, input_qubits)
qc.barrier()
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The preceding code renders the quantum circuit up to the oracle:
Figure 11.19: Oracle applying CNOT where the secret string is set to ‘1’
Since all our qubits are in a superposition state, by applying the phase shift
based on the secret string |S⟩, we get the following equation:
Therefore, from the preceding equation, our secret string will apply a
phase shift to each qubit where the string is set. This will shift the to
whenever the input bit x and the secret string s are equal to 1.
6. Finally, in our last step before applying measurements to the input qubits,
we apply another set of Hadamard gates. What this set of Hadamard gates

achieves is that it will return the state of each qubit back to either the or
state.
This is entirely dependent on whether the qubit experienced a phase shift
while passing through the oracle. If it did not, then the state would change
from to , or from to :
# Now let's close up our circuit with Hadamar
d gates
# applied to the input qubits
for idx in range(input_qubits):
qc.h(idx)
qc.barrier()
# Finally, let's add measurements to our inpu
t qubits
qc.measure(range(input_qubits), range(input_q
ubits))
qc.draw(output='mpl')
This will render the following circuit diagram, which completes the steps
to implement the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm along with the
measurement operators:

Figure 11.20: Final circuit that implements the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm
7. Now that the circuit is complete and ready to go, we can execute the circuit
on your local simulator and then on a real quantum device:
# Execute the circuit and plot the results
result = run_on_sampler(qc)
counts = result[0].data.c.get_counts()
plot_distribution(counts)
The results should have a 100% probability for the value of our secret
string, as illustrated in the following histogram:
Figure 11.21: Result identifies with 100% probability the value of our secret string
As you can see from the preceding result, like the earlier quantum algorithms,
we can solve certain problems in a single query, whereas it would take classical
systems a few queries to solve. These problems leveraged phase kickback,

where we used the phase to solve the question of whether the function was
balanced or constant.
Looking back at the step where we applied the last layer of Hadamard gates, it
appears as if the control qubit got flipped instead of the other qubit.
In this section, we learned about the foundational oracle-based algorithms and
how they illustrate quantum advantage over classical systems to solve problems.
We also learned about how oracles and ancilla qubits are leveraged to obtain
some of the solutions, which will, in turn, help you understand the more complex
algorithms as you expand your knowledge and research. Although these were
simple problems that have no commercial value by themselves, they did,
however, manage to trigger an interest in the quantum information science field
that is still growing to this day.
Summary
In this chapter, we covered some of the many quantum algorithms that employ
common techniques that are used in a variety of other quantum algorithms.
The goal of this chapter was to explore each of them systematically so you could
have a good understanding of the problem each algorithm solves. The topics here
are, of course, foundational and oracle-based, although the techniques are
commonly found in many other quantum algorithms.
In the next chapter, we will step away from the oracle-based foundational
algorithms and look at another form of algorithm that solves similar problems.
However, rather than using phases to identify the solution, they will instead
leverage periodicity, which is primarily why they are called periodic
algorithms.
Questions

1. Which algorithm would you use to determine whether an n-bit string is
balanced?
2. Implement the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm to find the state 170.
3. How many oracle functions are there?
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

12
Applying Quantum
Algorithms
In the last chapter, we considered the fundamentals that highlight the difference
between classical and quantum systems, particularly the use of superposition and
entanglement. In this chapter, we will focus on algorithms that have the potential
to solve more applicable problems, such as periodicity and searching. These
algorithms differ from the earlier algorithms as they are used in various domains
and are included in many modern quantum algorithms. A few examples of these
quantum algorithms are the quantum amplitude estimation, variational
quantum eigensolvers, and quantum support vector machine algorithms.
Having a good understanding of these algorithms will help you when learning
about or creating your own algorithms as the techniques used can be applied in
many industries. In this chapter, we will cover some of the fundamental
principles and techniques that these more modern, and complex, algorithms
leverage, to help you better understand them.
Periodic algorithms can be used to solve factorization or phase estimation
problems. Search algorithms can also provide some speedup over classical
algorithms in how they leverage amplitude amplification to find a specified
entry.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Understanding periodic quantum algorithms

Understanding the Quantum Fourier Transform algorithm
Understanding Grover’s search algorithm
After completing this chapter, you will be able to grasp the concepts of these
algorithms and leverage the algorithms already provided in Qiskit, so you can
use them without having to reinvent the wheel.
Technical requirements
This chapter assumes that you are familiar with some of the basic quantum
algorithm components, such as superposition, oracles, phase kickback, and
programming with Qiskit. You are also expected to understand basic linear
algebra, such as multiplying matrices, the complex conjugation of a matrix, and
inner products. Some advanced mathematics, such as an understanding of the
Fourier transform, is also assumed.
Here is the source code used throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
Understanding periodic
quantum algorithms
In Chapter 11, Understanding Quantum Algorithms, we covered algorithms that
use phase kickback to solve various problems.
In this section, we will start by understanding periodic quantum algorithms.
Periodic functions are those where values are repeated over time. Your watch,
for example, is periodic in that each minute has 60 seconds, each hour has 60
minutes, and each day has 24 hours.
If you have your watch set up with the hours from 1 to 12, then your watch has 2

periods per day, in that your watch will cycle through the numbers 1 to 12 twice
in one day. Of course, this is separate from the AM and PM indicators, whether it
is before or after midday. Periodic functions occur all around us in many ways,
so understanding how to relate them to a quantum circuit is key to understanding
many of the quantum algorithms, including one of the most famous, Grover’s
algorithm.
But for now, we will begin by extending our understanding of periodic functions,
particularly how we can understand and implement the Quantum Fourier
Transform (QFT) algorithm.
Learning about the QFT algorithm
QFT is related to Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) in that it too can
transform from one domain to another.
DFT converts a finite sequence of samples into a complexvalued function of frequency that is used to analyze many
applications, such as image processing and signal processing,
and can also be used to help solve partial differential equations.
DFT is used to transfer signals from the time domain to the frequency domain, or
in a more generalized description, mapping one domain, x, to another domain,
, with the following formula:
Similarly, we can define a quantum transformation as a transformation from one
basis to another. For example, all the computations we have done in this book so
far have been measured according to the Z basis. This means our basis states

have been set on the Z-axis of the qubit with the states and , referring to
the positive and negative ends of the Z-axis on the Bloch sphere, respectively.
There are, of course, other basis states that we can transition to if needed. One
example is the X-axis of the qubit, where the basis states there are and ,
which refer to the positive and negative ends of the X-axis on the Bloch sphere,
respectively. QFT would transform between these two basis states. The QFT is
used by many quantum algorithms, including Shor’s, as it has been shown to
have improvements over the classical implementation of a discrete Fourier
transform.
In this section, we will work through a simple example of a QFT algorithm to
extend our understanding of it when we see it used in many other quantum
algorithms.
We’ll begin by applying QFT to a simple three-qubit quantum state.
Understanding the QFT algorithm
Before getting into the details, let’s first get an understanding of what each axis
represents. As you recall from the Bloch sphere, one of the visual representations
of a qubit, it is made up of three axes, X, Y, and Z. Rotations around the X and Y
axes are what we use to adjust the amplitude of the qubit, that is, down along the
longitude of the Bloch sphere (the North Pole to the South Pole). Rotation
around the Z-axis is what we use to adjust the phase of the qubit, that is, around
the latitude of the Bloch sphere.
Each axis is a basis state, named by the axis, i.e. X-basis, Y-basis, and Z-basis. In
quantum, the Z-axis is generally referred to as the computational basis and either
the X- and Y-axis can be the Fourier basis. In this example, we will set the Xbasis as the Fourier basis. The QFT transform is generally a transformation from
one basis to another, in this case, from the computational (Z) basis to the Fourier
(X) basis.

To transform our quantum function from one basis state to another, we need to
apply QFT, as follows:
In the preceding equation, Z – basis refers to the basis states on the Z-axis,
and , and X – basis refers to the basis states (often referred to as the phase
states because rotation around them refers to rotations around the Z-axis) on the
X-axis, and . The Qiskit documentation
(https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/) refers to the Fourier basis with a
tilde (~), where QFT is the QFT Transform applied to the state , given as
follows:
This can be equated, where the transformation is represented by the QFT
between the amplitudes of xj and yk, as follows:
Now, let’s see how we can implement QFT in a quantum circuit.
Implementing the QFT algorithm
Let’s begin by deriving our implementation based on an input state ,.
An alternative is to apply it sequentially to the following formula as we move
from qubit to qubit. For this example, we will operate as follows; given a state
, we will apply a Hadamard gate where we add the phase based on the state ,
where each value, ji, is appended to the phase, as follows:

In the following exercise, we will implement the QFT of , where
. It’s important to note that the fractional parts of the exponents are binary, not
decimal:
1. We’ll begin by opening a new Jupyter notebook and import some common
objects and run our helper file:
# Importing standard Qiskit libraries
from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, transpi
le
from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers
import
generate_preset_pass_manager
from qiskit.visualization import *
from qiskit_ibm_runtime import QiskitRunti
meService, Sampler, Estimator, Session, Op
tions
service = QiskitRuntimeService(channel="ib
m_quantum")
2. Next, we’ll create a quantum circuit where the width is equal to the length
of our state value, '110':
# Initialize the 3-qubit quantum circuit
# Set the state '110'
s = '110'
num_qubits = len(s)
qc = QuantumCircuit(num_qubits)
3. Now that we have created our quantum circuit, let’s initialize the state, s, to
. Since we write from the least significant position, we will reverse s

accordingly as well:
# Set reverse ordering
s = s[::-1]
# Construct the state 110
for idx in range(num_qubits):
if s[idx] == '1':
qc.x(idx)
qc.barrier()
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The preceding code will initialize and render our circuit as follows:
Figure 12.1: Initializing the state, s, to
4. Now that we have prepared our state, we can begin transforming it using
QFT.
Let’s review our transformation equation with our state :
This states that for each qubit where we apply a Hadamard gate, we will
need to include rotations while traversing from the qubit down to the least

significant qubit—hence, . As we traverse down, the qubit states
decrease by each degree. This means each of the controlled phase
rotations, Control Rotation (CROT), is based on the following matrix
representation:
In the preceding equation, CROT(q)k is the CU1 gate, and the parameter q
is set as follows:
Therefore, we’ll start with the most significant qubit, q2, from our state
, as follows.
5. Starting at the most significant qubit, we’ll add a Hadamard gate to the
circuit:
# Import the value pi for our rotations
from numpy import pi
# Always start from the most significant q
ubit,
# in this case it's q2.
# Step 1, add a Hadamard gate
qc.h(2)
6. Now that we have our first step, the next step is to add CROT( ) gates
starting at k=2, which is the index of the most significant qubit position, q2,
and our parameter starts at the following:

We add the CROT gates from most significant to least significant, starting
at , and doubling the denominator of the parameter as we move down
each qubit:
# Step 2, add CROT gates from most significan
t qubit
qc.cp(pi/2, 1, 2)
7. We then repeat this as we traverse from the current qubit down to the next
qubit—in this case, q0:
# Step 3, add another CROT from 2 to the n
ext qubit down,
# while doubling the phase denominator
qc.cp(pi/4, 0, 2)
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
As we are traversing down, the denominator on the parameter is doubling
in size as well, such that the next parameter is as follows (note that all
qubits are initialized to the state :
This renders the following circuit, which now includes the Hadamard gate
and the two CROT gates:

Figure 12.2: The first set of transformations starting from the most significant qubit
8. That completes the first level, which dealt with the most significant qubit.
We will now move down to the next qubit (the second most significant
qubit) and repeat the process of adding a Hadamard gate, followed by
CROT(q) gates, where the phase rotations get smaller as we traverse down
each qubit. Let’s continue to the next qubit:
# Now that we finished from 2 down to 0
# We'll drop to the next least significant
qubit and
# start again,
# Step 1, add a Hadamard gate
qc.h(1)
9. This is the same as step 4 of adding a Hadamard gate; now, we apply the
control rotation gate in the same manner as we did earlier and then draw the
circuit:
# Step 2, add Control Rotation (CROT) gate
s from most
# significant towards
# least significant starting a pi/2, and d
oubling the

# denominator
# as you go down each qubit.
qc.cp(pi/2, 0, 1)
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
# Now that we finished from 1 down to 0
# We'll drop to the next least significant
qubit and
# start again.
This will complete the second transformation, which will render the
following circuit, which starts with a Hadamard gate and then appends the
CROT gates afterward:
Figure 12.3: The next transformation set starting at the next qubit down
10. Next, we will run our transformation on the last qubit, and then draw the
circuit:
# Step 1, add a Hadamard gate
qc.h(0)
# Since we are at the least significant qu
bit,
# we are done!
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')

Since this is the last qubit and the least significant qubit, it has no lower
levels, so we complete the CROT phase of the QFT. This renders the
following circuit so far:
Figure 12.4: The final transformation of our QFT circuit
11. Finally, once we have set all the rotations, we need to apply swap gates to
reverse our results. We need to do this to complete the QFT and set the
values in the proper order. The swap is performed from the outermost qubits
moving inward until you reach the last two qubits in the middle (if the total
number of qubits is even), or until you reach the last two pairs with a single
qubit in the middle (if the total number of qubits is odd).
To simplify this, we can create a function that will swap the outer qubits
and work its way toward the middle. In this case, since we only have three
qubits, we will only swap the outer two qubits, as follows:
# Define a function which will add the swap g
ates to the
# outer pair of qubits
def add_swap_gates(qc_swaps, qubits):
for qubit in range(qubits//2):
qc_swaps.swap(qubit, qubits-qubit-1)
return qc_swaps
12. Now, we can run our quantum circuit through the add_swap_gates

function and complete the circuit:
qft_circuit = add_swap_gates(qc, num_qubit
s)
qft_circuit.draw(output='mpl')
This will render our QFT circuit, which encodes our '110' value, as
follows:
Figure 12.5: The QFT circuit that encodes ‘110’
13. Let’s include some helper functions, similar to the functions we created in
the previous chapter, that will run on either simulators or quantum systems.
This time, we will include an option to select the number of shots.
# Run on a local Sampler
def run_on_sampler(circuit, shots):
from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmana
gers import generate_preset_pass_manager
from qiskit_ibm_runtime import Sampler
V2 as Sampler
from qiskit_ibm_runtime.fake_provider
import FakeManilaV2
# Run the sampler job locally using Fa
keManilaV2
fake_manila = FakeManilaV2()
pass_manager = generate_preset_pass_ma

nager(backend=fake_manila, optimization_le
vel=1)
transpiled_qc = pass_manager.run(circu
it)
# To ensure we get fixed results, set
seed
options = {"simulator": {"seed_simulat
or": 10258}}
sampler = Sampler(mode=fake_manila, op
tions=options)
result = sampler.run([transpiled_qc],
shots=shots).result()[0]
return result
# Run on the least busy quantum computer
def run_on_qc(circuit, shots):
# At the time of this writing we are u
sing the latest version of
# the Sampler primitive (V2), please r
eview the documentation to follow updates
if you are using a previous version.
from qiskit_ibm_runtime import Sampler
V2 as Sampler2
# Assign least busy device to backend
backend =
service.least_busy(min
_num_qubits=circuit.num_qubits,
simulator=False, operational=
True)
#Print the least busy device
print('The least busy device: {}'.form
at(backend))
result = {}

transpiler = generate_preset_pass_manag
er(backend=backend, optimization_level=3)
transpiled_qc = transpiler.run(circuit)
sampler = Sampler2(backend)
job = sampler.run([transpiled_qc], shot
s=shots)
job_result = job.result()
# Extract the results
result = job_result[0]
return result
14. To visualize our QFT results, we can execute the preceding circuit using the
state vector simulator to see our final QFT encoding for each qubit:
# Get the state vector simulator to view o
ur final QFT
# state
from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevecto
r
statevector = Statevector(qft_circuit)
plot_bloch_multivector(statevector)
The preceding code results in the following encoding for each qubit:

Figure 12.6: A Bloch sphere representation of the ‘110’ QFT encoded value
Note that q0 (q2 before the swap) has rotated (which is a
Hadamard (H) plus a rotation), q1 has rotated (H), and
q2 (q0 before the swap) has rotated 0, mainly due to q0 having a
value of 0 before the swap because it was initialized to .
Note that each qubit is in a superposition state and varies by phase based on the
'110' encoded value. We can also represent this using the qsphere object,
which will have the same information, only represented in a single sphere object:
plot_state_qsphere(statevector)
In the following diagram, we can see that the information is encoded into the
QSphere and has its encoded representation in the phase and state vector
indicated by the color wheel and QSphere, respectively:

Figure 12.7: A QSphere representation of the QFT representation of the ‘110’ state
Note that the colors indicate the phase of each state specified in
the results where, at the time of this writing, green indicates
-degree phase rotation for rotation states ‘000’ and ‘100’.
Congratulations! You have just completed encoding your first QFT! This is an
algorithm that you will see in many other algorithms that depend on periodic
functionality.
In this section, we learned about the QFT algorithm and implemented it as well.
One thing we have not covered, but which is important to mention, is that the
QFT also has an inverse function called the Inverse Quantum Fourier
Transform (IQFT). This is quite simply the reverse of the QFT and in essence
transforms the quantum state from the quantum Fourier basis back to the
computational basis. This is done, as described, by reversing the functionality

which was performed when transforming the QFT which includes reverse
rotations. That is to say, if we rotated a qubit , then when performing an
IQFT, we would rotate the qubit by the same angle, only this time in the opposite
direction, i.e. .
With an understanding of the basis of state transformation, you are now able to
leverage this in many periodic functions and algorithms, such as estimating
eigenvalues or unitary matrices and factoring discrete logarithms.
Next, we will look at one of the more famous search algorithms: Grover’s
algorithm.
Learning about Grover’s
search algorithm
Search algorithms are unique in that they can be leveraged by various algorithms
to find information, whether in a data repository or a list of values, such as
features in an image. The advantage with quantum, of course, is in the potential
for speeding up the search. Grover’s algorithm is one such example. It uses a
well-known technique that allows the use of interference to amplify certain
states in our quantum circuit in a way that will increase the amplitude of the
value we are searching for and decrease those that we are not. Let’s start, as
always, by describing the problem, where each state is analogous to an entry in
an unordered list.
Understanding the problem
The problem here is also very simple: we are given a set of states where all states
are set to 0, except one state which is set to 1. We wish to identify which one of
those states is set to 1.

Classically, this can be done in, in the best case, 1 step, if the first value is set. In
the worst case, it would take N steps, where N is the total number of states and
the last state is set. This means that on average, it will take N/2 steps to find the
value as we would need to check each value individually.
Clearly, this is not ideal if our set is a very large list. We need to find a better
way to find our value. This is where, in 1996, Lov Grover came in and
discovered a way to solve this problem with his now-famous quantum algorithm.
We’ll step through the implementation of Grover’s algorithm as we try to search
for a value in a three-qubit circuit.
To describe this problem using functions, we can state the following, given a
function:
From the preceding equation, for all cases of x except for a specific
case, x*, such that . Find the value of x*. Since we will be working
with qubits, let’s select a value N, such that N = 2n.
Now that we have defined our problem, let’s step through Grover’s search
algorithm.
Understanding Grover’s search
algorithm
Grover’s algorithm is similar to the Deutsch-Jozsa and Bernstein-Vazirani
algorithms in that it too leverages an oracle. However, note that the example
given here illustrates a very simple oracle where we know the tagged state
beforehand. This is done for demonstration purposes here; however, in realworld applications, the oracle will not only be more complex, but we will also
have no idea which state will be tagged.

Another similarity between Deutsch-Josza and Grover’s algorithm is that
Grover’s also leverages interference in a way that it will increase the amplitude
of the state we are searching for while decreasing all other states, which in turn
increases the speed by , where N is the number of states to search. This
means that rather than iterating through each value within N, we take an
exponential speedup, similar to what we did with Deutsch-Josza.
We’ll begin by explaining Grover’s search process in order to obtain an
understanding of how it works. For a deeper description of the mathematics
behind this, I recommend the book Dancing with Qubits by Robert S. Sutor,
which covers this in greater detail.
Grover’s search algorithm can be broken down into two main components—
perhaps three, if you count initializing all qubits into superposition and adding
measurements at the end—but that is something that most quantum algorithms
do, so we’ll just stick to the two main points. The first is referred to as Grover’s
oracle, and the second is the Grover diffusion operator.
In this example, we will describe a two-qubit system that, when placed in
superposition by applying a Hadamard gate to each qubit, provides four possible
states—00, 01, 10, and 11—as follows:

Figure 12.8: Two qubits in a superposition state
When in this state, the average equals the probability amplitude, which in this
case is 0.25, as indicated by the dotted line across the top of each state.
For this example, we’ll say the state that we wish to search for is the state
'10'.
The first component is the oracle, Uf. This is where we generally tag the value
we are searching for. By tagging, I mean we will signal that the state that we are
searching for will be identified by simply changing the sign of the state from
positive to negative. The transition would be as follows:

Figure 12.9: Changing the sign of the state to negative
Now that we have changed the sign, we can’t, unfortunately, just measure and go
at this point—mainly because, as we know, the probability amplitudes are
squared, so our results would all still be equal, which does not provide us with
any new information about what we are searching for. However, since we are
working with amplitudes, we can leverage interference here by increasing the
amplitude of the state we tagged and decreasing the amplitude of the other states.
How do we do this? By incorporating the second component of Grover’s search,
the diffusion operator.
The second component of Grover’s algorithm is the Grover diffusion operator.
Here, we will be performing a mathematical step known as inversion about the
mean. What this does is invert the distance between the average and the peak of
each state. This is analogous to having each state flip reflectively about the
average mean. Visually, the transition will be as follows:

Figure 12.10: Inversion about the mean amplifies the states constructively and destructively
As we can see from the results of performing the inversion about the mean, the
amplification of the tagged state is now significantly higher than the other states.
If we were to now take a measurement, we would see that the result with the
higher probability is the state we are searching for. Keep in mind, of course, that
this is all done with a single query to our quantum circuit!
One thing to note is that when the number of states, N, is large, this means we
will need to repeat the diffusion operator steps (and not the oracle constructor
steps) multiple times, which is what constructs and destructs the amplitudes. The
number of times to optimize the results is , where n is the number of qubits.
Let’s implement Grover’s search algorithm next.
Implementing Grover’s search
algorithm

As usual, we’ll explain each step described in the previous section while we
work through the algorithm step by step. To start, create a new Qiskit notebook
for this example and work through the following:
1. We’ll begin by declaring the value we want to set. Let’s set the value to
110. This way, we can use a three-qubit circuit to implement Grover’s
algorithm and place all the qubits in superposition by adding a Hadamard
gate to each qubit:
# Set the state we wish to search
N = '110'
num_qubits = len(N)
# Create the quantum circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(num_qubits)
# Set all qubits in superposition
qc.h(range(num_qubits))
qc.barrier()
#Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
This will render our initialized circuit:

Figure 12.11: Initialized quantum circuit in superposition
2. Next, we want to encode the state that we want to search—in this case, it is
the state . Here, we will reverse the state and encode N in the circuit:
# Reverse the state so it's in proper qubi
t ordering
N = N[::-1]
# Encode N into our circuit
for idx in range(num_qubits):
if N[idx] == '0':
qc.x(idx)
qc.barrier()
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
For each step, we will add a barrier so that we can see the process
rendered:
Figure 12.12: Encoding our state ‘110’, we mark the ‘0’ qubits in the state with an X gate
3. Next, we will create Grover’s oracle. What we will do here is first set the
most significant qubit in a superposition state, followed by a CNOT gate
where the target is the most significant qubit, and the source is all the other

qubits. Then, place another Hadamard gate on the most significant qubit to
complete the oracle. This will negate the state that we set in the previous
source cell, :
# Create the Grover oracle for our 3-qubit
quantum circuit
qc.h(2)
qc.ccx(0, 1, 2)
qc.h(2)
qc.barrier()
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The preceding code renders the following circuit, which we see sets the
two CNOT gates in our oracle surrounded by H gates on the most
significant qubit:
Figure 12.13: Applying Grover’s oracle to the circuit
4. Now, we want to reset the state that we are searching in the circuit so that it
returns to the superposition value:
# Reset the value after the oracle
for idx in range(num_qubits):
if N[idx] == '0':

qc.x(idx)
qc.barrier()
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The preceding code completes Grover’s oracle, which we described earlier
as the first component of Grover’s search algorithm:
Figure 12.14: The first component of Grover’s search algorithm
5. Next, we will implement the second component, the Grover diffusion
operator. We start by applying all the qubits in a superposition state:
# Set all qubits in superposition
qc.h(range(num_qubits))
qc.x(range(num_qubits))
qc.barrier()
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
This renders the following superposition state, followed by Grover’s
oracle:

Figure 12.15: The first step in the Grover diffusion operator: apply H gates to all qubits
6. Next, we will flip all the 0-state qubits to their negative phase. Here, the
most significant qubit is set as the target of the two CNOT gates:
# Apply another oracle, same as the previo
us
qc.h(2)
qc.ccx(0, 1, 2)
qc.h(2)
qc.barrier()
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
This renders the next step in the diffusion operator—that is, inversion
about the mean:
Figure 12.16: The second step of the diffusion operator: to invert about the mean
7. Finally, we wrap up the Grover diffusion operator by applying the first step
in reverse. Since we applied a set of H gates across all qubits, followed by a
set of X gates, also across all qubits, we will reverse this in the following
manner. Apply X gates across all qubits, then apply H gates across all
qubits:

# Reapply the X rotations on all qubits
qc.x(range(num_qubits))
qc.barrier()
# Reapply Hadamard gates to all qubits
qc.h(range(num_qubits))
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')
The preceding code completes the Grover diffusion operator component of
the quantum circuit:
Figure 12.17: The complete Grover’s algorithm circuit
To determine the ideal number of times to repeat the diffusion operator, n,
we simply need to compute n as follows,
where N is the number of (log N) qubits N=4 for two qubits; In this
example, we should add a second diffusion operator to bring the error
down from 3% to 1%.
8. Now, we’ll just add measurement operators and prepare to run the circuit on
the backend, but first on a local simulator on your device:
# Add measurement operators
qc.measure_all()
# Draw the circuit
qc.draw(output='mpl')

The preceding code will prepare the following quantum circuit to run on
either a simulator or quantum computer:
Figure 12.18: The complete quantum circuit ready to run on a simulator or quantum system
9. We’ll start by running the function we created to execute our circuit using
the Sampler primitive:
# Run on the sampler
result = run_on_sampler(qc, shots=4000)
counts = result.data.meas.get_counts()
# Print and plot results
print(counts)
plot_distribution(counts)
After executing the circuit, this will print and plot our results as follows:
{'010': 274, '110': 2237, '000': 198, '100':
499, '101': 175, '111': 238, '001': 191, '011'
: 188}
In the following figure, we can see that the state we are searching has the
higher probability, a quasi-probability of 0.559%, whereas all the other
states have a significantly lower probability of around 0.05%:

Figure 12.19: Results of executing Grover’s search of state 110 on a Sampler
Success! As expected, our Grover’s algorithm implementation has found
the state within a single query.
10. Now, let’s try it on a quantum device. We’ll select the quantum computer
that is the least busy and operational and has the number of qubits
necessary to run our quantum circuit.
# Execute the circuit on the least busy qu
antum computer
backend = service.least_busy(min_num_qubit
s = num_qubits,
simulator = F
alse,
operational =
True)
print("Set backend: ", backend)

The preceding code will print out the least busy quantum computer and
assign it to the backend variable.
11. We can now execute this as we did previously with the simulator, then print
and plot the results:
# Run the circuit on the backend
shots = 1000
results = run_on_qc(qc, shots)
counts = results.data.meas.get_counts()
# Print results
print(counts)
12. Once completed, you should see something similar to the following output:
The least busy device: <IBMBackend('ibm_os
aka')>
{'000': 85, '100': 52, '111': 219, '010':
61, '110': 373, '001': 73, '011': 71, '101
': 66}
13. We can now plot the quasi distribution of the results on a graph using the
following:
# Plot results
plot_distribution(counts)
This will display the following output:

Figure 12.20: Probability distribution
This, of course, depends on the device itself as each system is different
from one another. However, the results should be clear that the state with
the highest probability is the state that we are searching for—in this case,
.
As we can see here, the result with the highest probability is the state we are
searching for, and the other states have a lower probability. We can see enough
of a difference between each state to observe that the Grover’s search algorithm
that we implemented does indeed identify the state we are searching for. You
might also want to try this with a larger value N, just so you can observe the
results.
Congratulations! You have successfully implemented a variety of quantum
algorithms, which are foundational to understanding how quantum computers
are different in how they solve problems compared to classical systems and how

they have the potential to solve real-world problems.
Summary
There are many algorithms that implement many of the techniques we covered in
this and the previous chapter on quantum algorithms, many of which you will
see used in other algorithms, such as the quantum amplitude estimation and
variational quantum eigensolver algorithms, and so on.
I do strongly suggest trying variations of these algorithms yourself to get a better
feel and understanding of how they work.
In the next and final chapter, we will look at the features that are built into
Qiskit, which allow you as a researcher or developer to leverage them to create
your own quantum algorithms. You will gain the skills to integrate these
algorithms into your existing research or applications without having to worry
about developing circuits, mitigating against noise, or any of the other
components that make up an algorithm in Qiskit. This book has already done the
heavy lifting for you, so you can simply implement the algorithm and process
the results as you see fit.
Questions
1. What other problems can you solve using periodic functions?
2. Implement QFT on a five-qubit state—for example, '10110'.
3. Using Grover’s algorithm, find the following states: '101', '001', and
'010'.
4. How many iterations of Grover’s diffusion operator would you need to run
to find the state ?
5. Rerun the Grover’s search example. Only repeat Grover’s diffusion
operator twice and note the difference in the result. What do you see that is

different? What would you expect to change if you ran it more than three
times?
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

13
Understanding Quantum
Utility and Qiskit Patterns
Here we are, the final chapter. If you’ve made it this far, then congratulations on
keeping yourself focused and determined, your time was well invested! As we
close out this chapter, and the book, I want to also make sure I don’t just leave
you here with some basics and wish you the best. I’ve found most technical
books seem to do that. Not that there is anything wrong with that, but I always
felt like most don’t provide help regarding next steps or, better yet, any next best
action. I thought I would include this chapter as a shift from education to
enablement. In other words, where to go from here and how. With Qiskit 1.0
(and future updates), we should approach this as a transition to really getting a
head start towards enabling you with the proper tools and patterns to evolve your
current experiments towards ideal utility application candidates. The goal here is
that this book will not only provide you with the education to get started, but will
also provide you with some guidance to know what to expect and develop as the
technology grows and new features are released.
Up to now, we have covered a bottom-up approach to understand quantum
computing, where we started with the foundational quantum computational
properties, gates, and circuits. We then moved up towards combining those to
implement various quantum algorithms. We also covered how to use the various
simulators, generate noise models, and mitigate readout errors. All of this helps
in understanding the fundamental intricacies of quantum computing and how

they are used to create algorithms that are both effective and optimal.
However, it is a lot to ask of a developer, solution architect, or systems integrator
to learn all the inner workings just to understand how to integrate quantum
computing into their application or workflow. In fact, it is often difficult to find
those who want to wander down into the nuts and bolts of the quantum
algorithm. Generally, most of us would like to just load our data into an
algorithm, execute it on a quantum system, obtain the results, and just continue
with our experiments.
This top-down approach is where Qiskit Patterns comes into the picture.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
Understanding Quantum Utility
Understanding Qiskit Patterns
In this chapter, you will learn what quantum utility means and why it is key to
getting us closer towards quantum advantage.
We’ll also cover Qiskit Patterns and how it can simplify your development
experience to build complex quantum circuits. As most quantum algorithms and
applications become more complex over time, particularly now as we are
entering the era of quantum utility, we need to understand what they are and how
we can best use these building blocks to create scalable and efficient quantum
algorithms.
Finally, we’ll wrap up this chapter with a quick example using Qiskit Patterns
using Grover’s algorithm, which we learned about in the previous chapter, as I
do not want to finish this chapter without providing you with some code that
combines classical and quantum together.
Technical requirements

For this chapter, it is expected that you have an understanding of creating
quantum circuits and general application development using Python.
The following is the source code we’ll be using throughout this book:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Learning-QuantumComputing-with-Python-and-IBM-Quantum-Second-Edition.
Understanding quantum utility
Earlier, I mentioned the term quantum utility. I figured I would take the time to
describe in a bit more detail what that means and, more importantly, what it
doesn’t mean. First and foremost, let’s start by defining another term, quantum
advantage. Quantum advantage is a term that describes when a quantum
computer can solve a practical use case in science or business that is intractable
to classical systems.
One example of this could be Shor’s algorithm, which finds the prime factors of
an integer. This is currently difficult for classical systems to solve due to the
complexity of the task, which is why it is used to encrypt much of our digital
content, such as passwords. In the example of Shor’s algorithm, where it is
estimated to take millions of years to solve the problem using classical
computers, some say it could take a few hours on a fault-tolerant system.
Quantum advantage, at the time of writing, of course is a few years away, so it is
good that you are taking the time now to learn about this new technology so
when these systems reach quantum advantage, you’ll have a head start on
solving interesting problems. It’s also important to note that quantum advantage
will not happen all at once; it will be incremental and will vary based on the type
of problem and cost compared to running on a classical system. As technology
advances beyond quantum advantage, so will the solutions to classically
intractable problems.
Now that we have an idea of what quantum advantage is, let’s look at what

quantum utility means. Back in June of 2023, researchers from IBM and UC
Berkeley published a paper titled Evidence for the utility of quantum computing
before fault tolerance
(https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-06096-3). In
this paper, the authors were able to show that quantum computers can solve
problems at a scale beyond brute force classical simulation. Again, this isn’t to
say that this is quantum advantage, mostly because there are some quantuminspired classical methods that provided classical approximations using other
techniques beyond brute force. The paper used a 127-qubit quantum computer
that had almost 3,000 CX gates, which is quite a complex circuit to simulate
using brute-force methods. There of course have been a few quantum-inspired
classically based papers that were released that managed to reproduce the
solution; however, not all the results from each experiment aligned for certain
parameters. As a result, accuracy had begun to struggle, some ranging
approximately 20% from each other. Furthermore, there have been many other
papers that were published afterwards that are over 100-qubits and contain
thousands of CX gates. This highlights the fact that we are moving from where
we first started, with small-scale circuits, which could very easily be simulated
classically, to over 100-qubit circuits with thousands of CX gates. As the size of
the circuits, both width (number of qubits) and depth (number of CX gates)
grows, so does the cost of simulating the circuit classically. Cost here can refer
to loss of accuracy or speed. This era, which is a time before we hit quantum
advantage, is what is referred to as Quantum Utility. Furthermore, using the
error mitigation techniques discussed earlier in this book, allows running these
complex circuits on 100+ qubit systems. The era of utility means we can find
useful quantum applications to run without having to wait for fault-tolerant
quantum computers.
Now that we’re familiar with what quantum utility is, let’s look at what we as
developers should understand to take advantage of this latest move forward in

quantum technology to build these more complex quantum circuits.
Understanding Qiskit Patterns
Another announcement at the 2023 IBM Quantum Summit was the introduction
to Qiskit Patterns. Qiskit Patterns originated from the idea that as circuits get
larger and more complex, computational scientists should not be concerned
about what is happening at the hardware level. There is no need for a
computational scientist to understand which gate to use on a specific qubit, or
which is the ideal optimizer to use when transpiling the circuit to the hardware.
Computational scientists should have tools that can be used to provide them with
the latest hardware and software and simplify the usage of these 100+ qubit
systems. These tools should provide a way for scientists to generate code or
functions that will solve a specific problem or set of problems, and not create
circuits qubit by qubit, gate by gate. Therefore, the purpose of the Qiskit Patterns
is to provide the computational scientist with a way to inject a quantum
computational routine into their existing applications and workflows.
Now that we know the purpose of Qiskit Patterns, let’s look at what they are and
how to use them. Prior to stepping into the details, I do want to stress that this is
a new feature that is always being enhanced. There may be many changes to the
code and its usage. What I am writing here is what is current at the time of
writing. As we know, with all coding languages there are always updates or
changes, so I urge you to review the documentation first so you are up to speed
on the latest development. Even if there are changes in code, the concept of the
overall steps should still be the same.
Simply put, Qiskit Patterns are made up of 4 steps that are used to run algorithms
on a quantum computer and provide you with a result to use as part of your
application and/or workflow. The four steps are: map, optimize, execute, and
post-process. We’ll learn what each of these steps does and run an example

using a simple circuit. Of course, you can use any circuit that you wish.
Step 1, Map
In this step, we want to map the problem to a quantum circuit. This entails
encoding the problem and inputs into a quantum circuit or state. A simple
example we can use is to encode a binary image. This is an image where each
pixel is either black or white, 0 or 1, respectively. It is simple enough to read
each pixel and if the pixel is black, we leave the state as 0 and if it is white, we
add an X gate to change it to the 1 state. Of course, this means that we would
need the same number of qubits as we do pixels, so this is not easy to scale to
larger images that have millions of pixels.
So, we would need to find ways to encode these images so that they would not
need millions of qubits. This is where encoding comes in handy. If we can find a
way to encode pixels into a quantum state, then this will work nicely. There are
of course many ways to encode images, too many to list here, but by searching
quantum image processing, you should find many forms. A few of the earliest
forms are NEQR, which stands for Novel Enhanced Quantum Representation
for digital images, and FRQI, which is short for Flexible Representation of
Quantum Images. The mapping using FRQI maps the intensity value of the
pixel, let’s say a 256-bit grayscale image, to a single qubit (i.e., pi/256 would
represent the pixel value). In NEQR, you would map the values using 8 qubits,
where each qubit is set as a binary value, so the qubit intensity is not represented
by 1 qubit (as in FRQI), but 8 qubits (8 qubits that map to the 8 binary values
needed to represent the numbers from 0 to 256). These are just two, but there are
so many more, each of which has its own advantages and disadvantages. What
this means is that a lot of the work for you, as a computational scientist, is about
selecting the encoding, or mapping, that you believe is best for your experiment.
This mapping should ensure that your problem is not just encoded into a
quantum state, but encoded in a way where it provides an optimal way to

represent the problem you wish to solve. Once you have selected the proper
mapping of your problem and input, a circuit is generated. We are now ready to
move onto the next step in the Qiskit Pattern, optimization.
Step 2, Optimize your circuit
As we’ve covered in previous chapters, optimizing a circuit is not just one step
of mapping the circuit to the quantum hardware; there are many different aspects
to it. Thankfully, most of this is done automatically for us, but it also provides us
with ways to alter them, either by setting optimization_level option
values to specify the type of optimization to perform, but the recently added
resilience_level option values, which allow us to also select the type of
error suppression and error mitigation to apply to our circuit. As most of these
require some classical resources, this provides us with a way to set how much of
those classical resources to use. The result of the transpilation and optimization
is called Quantum Instruction Set Architecture (QISA). This optimized
circuit is specific to the quantum hardware we select to execute this circuit on,
which leads us to the next step, execute.
Step 3, Execute your circuit
One thing to note is that when we say execute a circuit, this is not to say we will
execute this circuit on a quantum system, particularly when running a variational
quantum algorithm that requires some classical interactions during execution.
This is why primitives like the Estimator and Sampler are great building blocks
as they provide the necessary context needed to execute these circuits to allow
classical and quantum interactions during execution time. Executing a circuit can
use one of many modes, such as Sessions, Jobs, and Batch.
We discussed these in Chapter 10, Suppressing and Mitigating Quantum Noise,
where we covered how circuits are run on a quantum system. Now that we have

executed our circuit on a quantum system, we now have reached the final step in
the Qiskit Pattern, post-processing.
Step 4, Post-process
This is just a matter of obtaining the results we received from executing our
circuit and processing them into what our classical application or workflow
expects. Up to now, we’ve been displaying our results as either graphs or as text
so we can view them and understand what the results mean. But when
integrating with an application or workflow, the results might need to either be
formatted in a certain way or aggregated with other results from various other
systems as a collection. In either case, the post-processing step is just a matter of
handling the results and passing them back to the calling system in a way that
will facilitate its integration into the application itself in a very robust way. This
of course would be dependent on how the results would be used in the next step
or displayed.
In essence, those are the 4 steps, straightforward and quite simple. But then
again, that is the point! Ideally, you, as a developer, computational scientist, or
quantum enthusiast, should not have to struggle with how to create, execute, and
obtain results from a quantum system. The process should be very
straightforward and simple. Speaking of simplifying the process, another
announcement during the Summit was that there will soon be AI included, which
would be able to auto-generate quantum code as well. It has not been announced
when this, and other AI features, will go live but the code will soon include this.
This should help those who are new and just getting started as it could serve as a
tool to ask how to create certain circuits, i.e. Grovers, Simon’s, etc. and of course
should also help those experienced researchers who would like to scale their
existing circuits into these larger complex circuits, which could advance their
solutions towards a path to quantum advantage.

Now, that all being said, I will not let you down! I did leave a little programming
for you here so to not have a chapter without any coding. We will implement
something that we built in the previous chapter, a simple logical expression to
determine the optimal result using Grover’s algorithm. This is a simple example
where we will start with a logical expression, which we can say is the classical
data coming in. Then we will proceed to use the Sampler primitive so we can run
it locally, define the problem, and use the Grover algorithm class to solve the
problem. This time, we will use the methods to input the problem and provide us
with the optimal result, which we will then print out and display visually, hence
completing the hybrid classical-quantum application. Here we go!
Implementing the logical
expression oracle
Logical expressions are commonly used to describe problems, particularly those
that have some constraints. These logical expressions can be used to construct a
circuit and execute it on various algorithms. Let’s begin with a simple problem.
Note that the names have been changed to protect the identities of bands who
have trouble staying together.
Melba, a music producer, has been tasked to put together the next big rock band,
based on the musicians who currently have a contract for a record company. The
following musicians are available:
Ivana is a singer who has a great voice and is available to tour as soon as
possible.
Karla is also a singer with a great voice and is also available to tour right
away.
Lex is a guitar player that can play any genre and has his own tour bus.
Leo is a drummer that gets along with everyone and is very liked in the
industry.

Now, here is the problem you have been asked to solve by the music producer:
Ivana and Karla tend to not get along on tour and have been known to have
creative differences when writing music. Lex and Leo, on the other hand, get
along fine together both in the studio and on tour. However, Ivana and Lex
recently broke up after the last time they toured together so we can have one of
the following options: only Ivana or Leo can participate, or neither and simply
replace them both.
What you need to do is determine which combination of these four musicians is
best for you to put together as a band, and then have them tour with minimal
issues based on their history together.
To solve this, let’s write this out as a logical expression:
1. We’ll map each musician to a variable such as: A = Ivana, B =
Karla, C = Lex, and D = Leo.
2. Next, we’ll create a logical expression using logical operators to illustrate
the constraints. To start, we know that Ivana and Karla do not get along, so
this we can represent as follows, where ^ indicates XOR. This means we
need at least one of them to participate, but not both at the same time:
.
3. Next, we know that Lex and Leo get along fine together, so we can
represent them with an AND operator as follows: .
4. Finally, we know that Ivana and Lex have just ended their relationship, so
they might not be open to working and touring together. We will represent
them as a NAND as follows. This indicates that they cannot work together,
but it will allow for both not to participate at all: .
5. By putting these all together, our complete logical expression for this
example is as follows: .
Now that we have defined our logical expression, let’s create an oracle on

the logical expression so that we can use Grover’s algorithm to search for
the optimal result.
6. We’ll begin by importing all the necessary modules and classes needed for
the rest of these steps and defining our logical expression:
# Import the necessary modules and classes
from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
from qiskit.visualization import *
from qiskit_algorithms import Grover, Ampl
ificationProblem
from qiskit.circuit.library.phase_oracle i
mport PhaseOracle
# State the SAT problem into a logical exp
ression
# A = Ivana, B = Karla, C = Leo, D = Lex
expression = '((A ^ B) & (C & D) & ~(A & C
))'
7. Now that we have defined our problem as a logical expression, let’s use this
logical expression to create our oracle, which as you recall is what we
use to describe the problem we wish to solve. In this case, it represents the
logical expression. Note that in the code I included a cell that would install
a dependency for using PhaseOracle (pip install tweedledum), as
you will likely also have to install Qiskit algorithms (pip install
qiskit-algorithms). I’ve commented the line out to install just in
case you already have it installed; however, if you get an error when
executing a cell that requires the dependency, simply install onto your
development environment using the command-line instruction, and restart
the kernel. This will then complete the installation and you can then run the
code without the dependency error:

# Create a PhaseOracle based on the logica
l expression
oracle = PhaseOracle(expression)
8. Now that we have created an oracle from the logical expression, we can
create the problem by calling the AmplificationProblem() method
and passing the expression we wish to solve as its argument:
# Construct the amplification problem from
the oracle
problem = AmplificationProblem(oracle,
is_good_state=oracle.eval
uate_bitstring)
problem.grover_operator.oracle.draw()
The preceding code calls the oracle from the Grover operator which
contains the quantum circuit representation of the oracle which is
illustrated as follows:
Figure 13.1: Quantum circuit representing the logical expression oracle

9. We can see that this oracle describes the logical expression, where q0, q1,
q2, and q3 represent our logical expression, where q0 = Ivana, q1 = Karla, q2
= Lex, and q3 = Leo. Observe that the control in q0 is not filled in. This is to
indicate that it is triggered when the state value of q0 is , as opposed to
the others, which are triggered when the qubit is in the state. We can
now use this oracle on any oracle-based (oracular) algorithm. Since we are
searching for the solution to this rock band problem, let’s use Grover’s
algorithm. First, we will set up a session and use the Sampler primitive for
this example, and then create the Grover’s algorithm class using the
sampler as the primitive. We’ll then pass the problem we defined in the
previous cell into the amplify method, which will in essence run
Grover’s algorithm, provide us with the result, and display it:
# Using the Sampler to run circuit
from qiskit.primitives import Sampler
# Set the Options
sampler = Sampler()grover = Grover(sampler
=sampler)
result = grover.amplify(problem)
plot_distribution(result.circuit_results[0
])
The preceding code results in the following output, which represents the
value we are searching for: 1110. Keep in mind that the qubit at position
0 is represented by the least significant bit (far right). This means that the
result, 1110, is equal to D=1, C=1, B=1, A=0:
We also obtain the following quasi-distribution:

Figure 13.2: Grover solution results based on the logical expression oracle
As shown by the preceding results, the algorithm indicates our solution is 1110.
This states that Karla, Leo, and Lex are the three ideal musicians to recruit into
the next band project. Melba has then decided to recruit Ivana as a solo career
singer.
This, of course, is a simple example. As you can imagine, if your expression is
more complex, then the Grovers search would help determine that in just a few
lines of code. As you can see, you can take a problem that’s defined by a logical
expression on a classical system and then, by leveraging the Qiskit Runtime and
Grover’s algorithm class, prepare the problem in a variety of ways, all of which
can be executed on a quantum system. All of this can be done without having to
delve into the lower layers of the quantum algorithm, i.e., quantum gates,
operators, error mitigation, etc.
As Qiskit continues to add many more features, algorithms, utilities, and other
artifacts, this will help you create flexible yet modular quantum applications that

suit all your needs.
Summary
In this chapter, we covered Qiskit Patterns, which are focused on helping you
quickly develop robust quantum circuits to include into your applications and
workflows. With the release of Qiskit 1.0 and future changes, I also highly
recommend you keep up with the latest changes. Qiskit 1.0 has a nice roadmap
filled with updates to primitives, patterns, and many features that not only help
you get up to speed with the development process but also ensure that your
circuits can scale up to larger utility sized circuits.
Now that you have the general skills to understand how to start creating quantum
applications and using Qiskit Patterns in a way that simplifies the creation
process, you can start applying these features into your existing circuits, or in
new circuits if you are just starting out.
Finally, we looked at a problem that we needed to solve using Grover’s quantum
algorithm, without having to really understand how they are constructed,
meaning we did not have to create a quantum circuit, an oracle, or diffusion
operators to run the algorithm. The focus was on how to represent the problem,
in this case as a logical expression, and apply it via a combination of available
classes and methods of the algorithm to present the problem and solve it. Just
keep in mind that as we are moving towards quantum utility, there will be more
efficient and modern ways to implement this and future algorithms. As
mentioned throughout this book, these are just the principles and general
programming practices to help get you started, but as quantum computing
evolves, so to will the algorithms and the way we think about how to program.
It’s with this that you should take away from this book, it’s a place to start for
you to take the code and keep on pushing towards the outer bounds of your
ingenuity and imagination. But for now…

Congratulations! You’ve taken a very large step towards getting yourself started
with learning and building quantum applications. Initially, we followed a
bottoms-up approach, which is to start by creating and running quantum circuits
on both a locally installed simulator and on a quantum computer. Doing this
helped you understand the inner workings of how a quantum circuit is built and
executed on a quantum system. Next, you reviewed the various algorithms and
quantum computing principles that differentiate between classical and quantum
applications. By running these applications, you also visualized the results and
of course the effects caused by various environmental effects, which in turn
helped you learn about the various features that mitigate the noisy effects of the
quantum computer. And finally, you looked at a top-down approach offered by
the Qiskit Runtime to help you quickly see how some of these algorithms in
various domains are used to solve small problems. The hope here is that this
book has provided you with a simple gateway to simplify your journey into the
quantum computing world and, as always, I look forward to reading your
research papers or perhaps your own textbook!
Welcome to quantum!
Questions
1. What are the four steps of Qiskit Patterns?
2. Which Qiskit Pattern handles mapping a quantum circuit to the hardware?
3. When encoding your problem to a quantum state, which Qiskit Pattern step
are you on?
4. Why did we use a Sampler and not an Estimator primitive for the Grover
example?
Join us on Discord

Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

Appendix A: Resources
In addition to this book, there are many other resources available that I highly
recommend you use to get a deeper understanding of quantum computing and
where to find the latest research. As you will notice, quantum technology is
evolving at a very rapid pace, so much that it was rather difficult to keep up as
this book was written. Believe it or not, it took longer to update and keep up with
the updates for this edition than it took to write the first edition! But believe me,
it was well worth the wait, as the current state of quantum has not only changed
how we program but how we build and run circuits. Things which were
challenging in the past such as creating circuits at the gate level are now much
easier using primitives and other features of the Qiskit Runtime.
The following resources should help guide you to understanding not only the
fundamentals and the technology, but will keep you up to date with the latest
features and releases. In fact, Qiskit 1.0, which was released during the writing
of this book, has so much that it would likely need a book all on its own! The
contents of this appendix is far from an exhaustive list of resources, but it does
have key links and information:
IBM Quantum Learning Platform: This is where you can find a variety
of learning resources for all levels:
https://learning.quantum.ibm.com. Here, you will find various
learning materials, tutorials, and online courses, which include topics
beyond quantum computing, including an introduction to quantum
cryptography. All courses are perfect for beginners and experienced
researchers and developers; each course walks you step by step from the
basics all the way up to advanced topics.

The documentation: The link for the full documentation is
https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/. This is the main documentation
page for all the topics discussed in this book. This link is one you’ll want to
bookmark as it will be your guide and at times a great time-saver to help
you migrate code to new versions or to get familiarity with new features.
The Qiskit GitHub repository: The GitHub repository link for Qiskit is
https://github.com/Qiskit. This is the Qiskit GitHub repository
where you will find the open-source code for Qiskit. Like most other opensource GitHub projects, you can fork and contribute to the open-source
project by either mitigating any issues or implementing a design request.
You can also submit requests for enhancements or issues you may find. If it
is your first time, it is recommended to work on issues labeled good first
issue.
Qiskit Slack community: The link to join the Qiskit Slack community is
https://qisk.it/join-slack. This is the Qiskit community’s
worldwide Slack channel. It is here where the real fun begins! You’ll not
only find quantum researchers, professors, students, and quantum
enthusiasts, but you’ll also find various channels that discuss all aspects of
quantum and Qiskit, from hardware to software, to practically any quantum
project you can think of. This is where you can meet others like you who
are either just getting started or looking to advance their knowledge.
Quantum Algorithm Zoo: As the welcome page indicates, this site is a
comprehensive catalog of quantum algorithms. It provides details about the
algorithm type, speedup, and a description of the algorithm. They are
grouped by types such as algebraic and number-theoretic, oracular,
approximation and simulation, and several others. This is very useful
should you want to get a quick overview of an algorithm and how it works.
The link for this page is http://quantumalgorithmzoo.org/.
Arxiv: Quantum Physics: This is an open-access documentation

repository for scholarly papers and articles, at
https://arxiv.org/archive/quant-ph. This resource is for
articles that specifically cover the topic of quantum physics, a topic that
also includes many quantum computation papers.
IBM Quantum Network quantum papers: This resource provides a list of
all research papers that were published by the IBM Quantum research team
and IBM Quantum Network partners and members:
https://ibm.biz/quantum-network-arxiv.
The link is to an AirTable, an online hybrid spreadsheet database, which
lists the industry domains to which a given project is relevant, such as
finance, optimization, chemistry, machine learning, error mitigation,
quantum utility, and so on. It also lists the name of the company and which
quantum computers they used during their research. Arxiv links to all the
papers listed are also included. This is a great resource to have to ensure
you keep up to speed on the latest research and the wider quantum
research landscape.
The Qiskit YouTube channel: The URL for this channel is
https://www.youtube.com/Qiskit. This is the official Qiskit
YouTube channel, on which there are several series on research and
development with frequently scheduled uploads to keep viewers up to date
on the latest content and research from the IBM quantum research team,
and IBM Quantum Network partners and members.
SciRate: This site (https://scirate.com/) gathers the top-rated
Arxiv papers in each category, including quantum physics. It’s a good
resource should you have time to read what most people are reading about
from Arxiv.
Join us on Discord

Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

Appendix B: Assessments

Chapter 1 – Exploring the IBM
Quantum Tools
Question 1
Which Application contains your API token?
Answer
There are two places to obtain your API token. The first is the Account settings
view, where the API token is available and where you can regenerate a different
token if needed. The other is on the main dashboard.
Question 2
Which device in your resources list has the fewest qubits?
Answer
The availability of the device with the fewest qubits will vary based on the
quantum devices available. However, at the time of writing, there are systems
with no less than 127 qubits. The next systems will be of sizes 133 qubits and
higher. This is due to the recent shift to the IBM Quantum Platform to provide
quantum utility systems (over 100 qubits).
Question 3
Which Application would provide you a qubit map of a quantum system?

Answer
The IBM Quantum Platform provides the Compute Resources application
view, which displays all available quantum systems.

Chapter 2 – Creating Quantum
Circuits with IBM Quantum
Composer
Question 1
From the Composer, where would you find the time it took to run your circuit on
a quantum computer?
Answer
You would find it in the Status Timeline view of the Composer Jobs view.
Question 2
How would you remove or add a qubit to your circuit on the composer?
Answer
You would click on a qubit and select either the + or the trashcan icon to add or
remove a qubit from the circuit, respectively.
Question 3
On which view would you specify which quantum system to run your circuit?
Answer
You would use the Setup and run view, which is accessible from the Composer

view, to select the system.
Question 4
Which sphere would be ideal to view the quantum state of three qubits in a
single sphere?
Answer
You would use the qsphere to represent multiple quantum states in a single
sphere.

Chapter 3 – Introducing and
Installing Qiskit
Question 1
In your own words, describe the difference between a kernel developer and an
application developer.
Answer
In general, the kernel developer can be seen as a developer that creates the
specific circuit for a quantum system. It is analogous to a classical assembly
developer. An application developer would integrate a quantum algorithm into a
classical application or workflow.
Question 2
If you wanted to obtain the unitary matrix of a circuit, which simulator would
provide the unitary matrix result?
Answer
The unitary simulator from the Qiskit Aer library.
Question 3
Can you name and describe in your own words each of the five simulator
categories that are provided by Aer?

Answer
The details of each are described in the chapter; this question is to check that you
have an intuitive understanding of each simulator. For example, a state vector
simulator does not need a measurement as it only computes the final state of the
circuit.
Question 4
Which module would you need to import to plot a histogram?
Answer
The Qiskit Visualization module.

Chapter 4 – Understanding
Basic Quantum Computing
Principles
Question 1
How would you create a circuit that entangles two qubits where each qubit is
different (that is, 01, 10)?
Answer
We can use the following code to create a circuit that entangles two qubits:
qc = QuantumCircuit(2,2)
qc.h(0)
qc.x(1)
qc.cx(0,1)
qc.measure([0,1], [0,1])
qc.draw()
Question 2
Create a circuit with a multi-qubit gate, such as a controlled-Hadamard gate.
Answer
The circuit will just need to be ensured to have two qubits and include a
controlled Hadamard gate (ch). In the following example, the first qubit is the

control and the second qubit is the target. We add a Hadamard gate to the control
qubit to ensure we will get either a 0 or 1; otherwise, the control will never be
set:
qc = QuantumCircuit(2,2)
qc.h(0)
qc.ch(0,1)
qc.draw()
Question 3
Create all 4 Bell states in a circuit.
Answer
The circuit will just need to have two qubits and include a controlled-X gate
(cx), where the first argument is the control and the second is the target. In the
following example, the first qubit is the control and the second qubit is the
target. We add a Hadamard gate to the control qubit to ensure we will get either a
0 or 1; otherwise, the control will never be set:
qc = QuantumCircuit(2,2)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0,1)
qc.draw()
Subsequent circuits will just alter the direction of the cx gate’s control and target,
and ensure that the Hadamard gate is on the same qubit as the control.

Question 4
What are the three quantum computation principles?
Answer
The three quantum computation principles are superposition, interference, and
entanglement. Superposition and interference are described in classical physics,
and entanglement is described in quantum physics.

Chapter 5 – Understanding the
Qubit
Question 1
Which would provide visual information about the phase of a qubit—the Bloch
sphere or the qsphere?
Answer
Both do. The Qiskit sphere (q-sphere) includes a checkbox to visualize the phase
information. The Bloch sphere illustrates the phase by the position of the vector
when it is out of phase, which is to say it is rotated about the z axis.
Question 2
Can you visualize multiple qubits on the Bloch sphere? If not, then describe why
you wouldn’t.
Answer
No, we can’t visualize multi-qubits on the Bloch sphere as we can on the
qsphere. The Bloch sphere is generally leveraged to illustrate a single qubit
vector position for a given state, whereas the qsphere includes the phase. To
represent multiple qubits using the Bloch sphere, you will need to have one
Bloch sphere for each qubit.
Question 3

Write out the tensor product of three-qubit states in all forms.
Answer
The resulting basis states for a three-qubit system are
.
Question 4
What is the probability amplitude of a three-qubit system?
Answer
The amplitude of a three-qubit system is , where n is the number of qubits,
which results in .

Chapter 6 – Understanding
Quantum Logic Gates
Question 1
For the multi-qubit gates, try flipping the Source and Target. Do you see a
difference when you decompose the circuit?
Answer
No, there is no difference that can be seen, only that the source is now assigned
to the opposite qubits.
Question 2
Decompose all the gates for both single- and multi-qubit circuits. What do you
notice about how the universal gates are constructed?
Answer
The single gates are now displayed by their respective basis gate, including
rotation values, if any. Multi-qubit gates, such as the Toffoli gate, are also broken
down into specific gates that are used to construct the operation of the Toffoli
gate between the assigned qubits.
Question 3
Implement the Toffoli gate where the target is the center qubit of a three-qubit
circuit.

Answer
Use the following code to implement the Toffoli gate where the target is the
center qubit of a three-qubit circuit:
qc = QuantumCircuit(3)
qc.ccx(0,2,1)
qc.draw()
Question 4
Decompose the Toffoli gate. How many gates in total are used to construct it?
Answer
When decomposing the Toffoli gate down to Hadamard, T, T dagger, and CX
gates, there are a total of 15 gates, and it runs 11 operations deep. It’s good to
note that the depth might change if a more efficient way of composing the
Toffoli gate is developed.
Question 5
Apply the Toffoli gate along with a Hadamard gate to a state vector simulator
and compare the results to that from the Sampler primitive. What differences do
you see and why?
Answer
The Sampler primitive, since it runs 1024 shots by default, will produce a result
of approximately 50% 000 and 50% 001, assuming placement of the
Hadamard gate is in the first qubit. On the other hand, the state vector simulator,

which only runs a single shot, will either result in the state 000 or 001; the
results of which will vary depending on the qubit in which you placed the
Hadamard gate.
Question 6
If you wanted to sort three qubits in the opposite direction, which gates would
you use and in which order?
Answer
You can use the swap gate to switch the value of each qubit from one qubit to
another (for an example of two qubits):
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
qc.x(0)
# current state is '01'
qc.swap(0,1)
# current state is reversed, '10'

Chapter 7 – Programming with
Qiskit
Question 1
Construct a random quantum circuit with a width of 4 and a depth of 9.
Answer
from qiskit.circuit.random import random_circuit
#Circuit with a width = 4, a depth = 9
qc = random_circuit(4, 9, measure=True)
Question 2
Create another random quantum circuit with the same width as the circuit you
created in Question 1 and concatenate it so that it is added before the random
quantum circuit you created.
Answer
qc1 = random_circuit(2,2)
qc_combined = qc.compose(qc1, [0,1], front=True)
Question 3
Print the circuit properties of the concatenated quantum circuit from Question 3

and specify the total number of operators, not including any measurement
operators.
Answer
qc_combined.draw()
qc_combined.count_ops()
Question 4
Create a circuit with a parameterized RY gate that would rotate by an angle of
.
Answer
import numpy as np
from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
param_theta = Parameter('Ɵ')
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
qc.rz(param_theta,0)
qc = qc.assign_parameters({param_theta: np.pi/2})
qc.draw()

Chapter 8 – Optimizing and
Visualizing Quantum Circuits
Question 1
Can you name two components of the transpiler?
Answer
Pass and PassManager.
Question 2
Which component allows you to specify the passes to use?
Answer
PassManager is used to specify which passes are used and which passes can
communicate with other passes.
Question 3
What is the default optimization_level value when running the
transpile() function?
Answer
Optimization level 1.

Question 4
Name the three Layout Selection Passes.
Answer
Trivial, Dense, and Sabre.

Chapter 9 – Simulating
Quantum Systems and Noise
Models
Question 1
Can you list all the simulators found in the Qiskit Aer module?
Answer
The list of simulators can be generated using the Aer.backends() function.
Question 2
Create a qsphere representation of a qubit on the negative Y axis, creating the
state , using only a single Hadamard gate along with the phase gates.
Answer
In order to accomplish this, you will need to set the qubit in a superposition
state. This can be done using the Hadamard gate (H), which will place the qubit
in the state . After that, we will have to run a phase shift from the state
to the state, which would mean we need a phase gate to shift the state by a
phase of , as follows:
qc = QuantumCircuit(1)

qc.h(0)
qc.sdg(0)
simulator = Aer.get_backend('statevector_simulato
r')
transpiled_qc = transpile(qc, backend=simulator)
result = simulator.run(transpiled_qc).result()
statevector = result.get_statevector(transpiled_q
c)
statevector
Question 3
When initializing a set of qubits in a circuit, what must the total probability
across all states be?
Answer
The sum of the squares of the total param values in the initialize
function argument must add up to 1, as in the following example, where is set
twice. So, if you take the sum of the squares, it will be equal to 1:
import numpy as np
qc = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
init_qubits = [0, 1]
qc.initialize([1, 0, 0, 1] / np.sqrt(2), init_qub
its)
Question 4
Can you use the qsphere to visualize both the phase and probability information

of a qubit?
Answer
Yes, the phase is given by the color of the state vectors and the probability is
visualized by the size of the tips of the state vectors. The larger the diameter, the
higher the probability.
Question 5
What would happen if you set the depolarization error values close to 1?
Answer
This will set the value to 1, therefore completely depolarizing the channel.
Question 6
If you applied a readout error equally to all qubits, what results would you
expect and why?
Answer
When running on a simulator, rather than resulting in an ideal condition (no
errors), you will instead see errors, where the significance of the errors is based
on the set ReadoutError() parameters.

Chapter 10 – Suppressing and
Mitigating Quantum Noise
Question 1
List the three main error mitigation techniques used by the Qiskit Runtime
service.
Answer
Minimal mitigation, medium mitigation, and heavy mitigation.
Question 2
Which resilience levels are used for error mitigation?
Answer
Levels 0 through 2, where level 1 is the default.
Question 3
What other reversible gates could you use to fill in the idle time of a qubit using
Dynamical Decoupling?
Answer
Any reversible gate, XGate or YGate, for example.

Question 4
Which type of noise contributes to amplitude dampening of a qubit?
Answer
Decoherence.
Question 5
Which type of noises contribute to dephasing of a qubit?
Answer
White noise, pink noise, and flux noise.

Chapter 11 – Understanding
Quantum Algorithms
Question 1
Which algorithm would you use to determine whether an n-bit string is
balanced?
Answer
The Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm can be used to determine whether a function is
constant or balanced.
Question 2
Implement the Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm to find the state 170.
Answer
To create the circuit, you need the binary representation of 170. Then, after
applying a Hadamard gate to all the qubits, except the ancilla qubit, to which you
will first apply a NOT gate followed by a Hadamard gate, apply a CX gate to
each qubit that is represented by the binary value for 170, which is represented
by the value 10101010. So, you would apply a CX gate to each of the odd
qubits, where the control of each CX gate should be set to qubit 1, 3, 5, and 7
and the target of each CX gate is the ancilla qubit. Then, apply a Hadamard gate
followed by a measurement operator to all qubits except the ancilla qubit.

Question 3
How many oracle functions are there?
Answer
In general, most algorithms have one oracle function; however, there are some
algorithms that require more than one, or multiple runs of a function, such as the
Grover algorithm, which repeats the oracle and diffusion operator function based
on the number of qubits of the circuit.

Chapter 12 – Applying
Quantum Algorithms
Question 1
What other problems can you solve using periodic functions?
Answer
The Quantum Fourier transform (QFT) is one of the more popular algorithms
to solve periodic functions.
Question 2
Implement QFT on a 5-qubit state—for example: ‘10110’.
Answer
Using the same example in the book, simply extend another swap gate repetition
by adding another qubit.
Question 3
Using Grover’s algorithm, find the following states, ‘101’, ‘001’, and ‘010’.
Answer
Simply change the numerical value on the argument to the values above, then
observe the change in the circuit’s oracle representing each of the three values.

Since all are 3 qubits in length, the repetition will be the same for each value
(just once).
Question 4
How many iterations of Grover’s diffusion operator would you need to run to
find the state ?
Answer
Use the following to determine the number of times to repeat the function,
, where N is the number of qubits. Here, N=4.
Question 5
Rerun the Grover’s search example. Only repeat Grover’s diffusion operator
twice and note the difference in the result. What do you see that is different?
What would you expect to change if you ran it more than three times?
Answer
The amplitude difference between the value we are searching for and the other
values will vary differently, either increasingly or decreasingly.

Chapter 13 – Understanding
Quantum Utility and Qiskit
Patterns
Question 1
What are the four steps of Qiskit Patterns?
Answer
Map, optimize, execute, and post-process.
Question 2
Which Qiskit Pattern handles mapping a quantum circuit to the hardware?
Answer
The optimization step handles mapping the circuit to the hardware.
Question 3
When encoding your problem to a quantum state, which Qiskit Pattern step are
you on?
Answer
You are mapping the input values of your classical data into a quantum state.

Question 4
Why did we use a Sampler and not an Estimator primitive for the Grover
example?
Answer
We did not have to use any observables to solve Grover’s algorithm. Simply
returning the quasi-distribution of the results provided the answer.
Join us on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other
readers:
https://packt.link/3FyN1

packt.com
Subscribe to our online digital library for full access to over 7,000 books and
videos, as well as industry leading tools to help you plan your personal
development and advance your career. For more information, please visit our
website.
Why subscribe?
Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks and
Videos from over 4,000 industry professionals
Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you
Get a free eBook or video every month
Fully searchable for easy access to vital information
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
At www.packt.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles,
sign up for a range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and
offers on Packt books and eBooks.

Other Book You May Enjoy
If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by Packt:
Dancing with Qubits

Robert S. Sutor

ISBN: 9781837636754
Explore the mathematical foundations of quantum computing
Discover the complex, mind-bending concepts that underpin quantum
systems
Understand the key ideas behind classical and quantum computing
Refresh and extend your grasp of essential mathematics, computing, and
quantum theory
Examine a detailed overview of qubits and quantum circuits
Dive into quantum algorithms such as Grover’s search, Deutsch-Jozsa,
Simon’s, and Shor’s
Explore the main applications of quantum computing in the fields of
scientific computing, AI, and elsewhere

Packt is searching for authors
like you
If you’re interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit
authors.packtpub.com and apply today. We have worked with thousands
of developers and tech professionals, just like you, to help them share their
insight with the global tech community. You can make a general application,
apply for a specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author for, or submit your
own idea.
Leave a Review!
Thank you for purchasing this book from Packt Publishing—we hope you
enjoyed it! Your feedback is invaluable and helps us improve and grow. Please
take a moment to leave an Amazon review; it will only take a minute, but it
makes a big difference for readers like you.
Scan the QR code below to receive a free ebook of your choice.
https://packt.link/NzOWQ

Index
A
Acquisition channel 184
Acquire channel 184
Aer 49
Qasm simulator 50
Statevector simulator 50
Unitary simulator 50
Aer simulator 49, 224
backend options 225
circuits, running 224-227
methods 225
parameters, adding to backend options 227
qubits, initializing on circuit 228-233
AirTable 366
Algorithm developer 46, 47
amplitude damping error 254
amplitude estimation 89
Anaconda
installing 52
reference link 52

ancilla qubit 309
AND gate 100
Apache 2.0 license
reference link 51
Application Programming Interface (API) 47
arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) 182
Arxiv
reference link 366
B
backend devices
circuit mappings, comparing 197, 198
Bell states 90
implementing 92-95
preparing 90, 91
Bernstein-Vazirani (BV) algorithm 294, 318
implementing 319-325
learning 318
problem 318
used, for generating quantum solution 319
bitstring 101
black box 299
Bloch sphere 69, 105
Bra-Ket notation 69

C
channels, Qiskit Pulse
Acquisition channel 184
Pulse channel 184
check maps 200
circuit analysis 200
circuit graphs
customized visual circuits 214-217
directed acyclic graph, drawing 217-219
enhancing 214
visualizing 214
Circuit Layer Operations Per Second (CLOPS) 10
circuit mappings
comparing, on backend devices 197, 198
classic bit gates
used, for building quantum circuit 31-39
classical bits
reviewing 100, 101
versus quantum bits 100
classical logic gates
reviewing 116, 118
classical randomness 67, 68
classical systems 295-297
quantum computational systems, integrating 44
coin-flipping experiment

building 77-79
Conda
reference link 53
constructive interference 88
Control-H (CH) 154
Controlled NOT (CNOT) gate 83
Control-Not (CNOT) gate 304
Control-NOT gate (CNOT gate) 151-154
Control-X (CX) gate 152
Control-Y (CY) 154
Control-Z (CZ) 154
Cooper pairs 113
Copenhagen interpretation 66
correction
versus error suppression 282-290
versus mitigation 282-290
customized visual circuits 214-217
D
De Broglie-Bohm theory 66
decoherence 251-254
noise effects 278
decoherence errors 279, 280
density matrix
reference link 238

dephasing 279
dephasing errors 281
depolarizing error 254
destructive interference 88
deterministic random bit (DRB) generators 67
Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm 294, 308
implementing 310-317
problem 308, 309
used, for generating quantum solution 309, 310
Deutsch's algorithm
implementing 301-308
learning 297
problem 297, 298
problem, defining 299
quantum problem 299, 300
diffusion operator 342
Dirac notation 69, 295
directed acyclic graph circuit
drawing 217, 219
Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) 328
DiVincenzo criteria 147
Documentation application
using 14, 15
double-slit experiment 64, 65
dynamical decoupling 265

Dynamical Decoupling (DD) 283
E
Echoed Cross-Resonance gate 274
entangled qubits
behavior, implementing 81-85
entanglement 79, 81
coins, entangling 86, 87
error suppression 282
versus correction 282-290
versus mitigation 282-290
extrinsic noise 252
F
flux noise 281
foundational oracle-based quantum algorithm
learning 318
Fourier transform 328
G
GaussianSquare pulse 183
good first issue 59
Graphical Editor view 26
Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) 225
Grover diffusion operator 341

Grover's algorithm 89, 328
Grover's oracle 341
Grover's search algorithm 339-343
implementing 344-351
problem 339, 340
H
Hadamard gate 72
Hadamard (H) gate 123-125
Heisenberg uncertainty principle 75
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 68
Hilbert space 116
I
IBM Quantum channel
reference link 57
IBM Quantum Composer 21, 22
components 22
launching 22
used, for creating quantum circuit 31
IBM Quantum Composer, components
functionalities 22-25
views, customizing 26
IBM Quantum Composer, views
Graphical Editor view 26

Probabilities view 29, 30
Q-sphere view 30, 31
Statevector view 27-29
IBM Quantum Experience 1
IBM Quantum Learning Platform
reference link 365
IBM Quantum Network
reference link 366
IBM Quantum Platform (IQP) 1, 295
Compute resources view 8-12
latest jobs 12, 13
Manage account settings view 5, 7
pending jobs 12, 13
registering 3-5
reference link 3
working with 3
IBM Quantum tools 15-18
Identity gate (I gate) 126
Identity (I) Pauli gate 126
instructions 181
parameters 181, 182
interference 88
constructive interference 88
destructive interference 88
intrinsic noise 252

Inverse Quantum Fourier Transform (IQFT) 339
J
Job component 188-190
K
kernel developer 46, 47
Kronecker product 150
L
LaTeX 214
Layout Selection type 200
custom layouts, applying 209-211
default layouts, applying 201-208
pass manager, using 212-214
local Qiskit environment
configuring 54-57
Logical Expression Oracle
implementing 359-362
logic gates 116
M
many-worlds interpretation 66
measurement operator 120-163
Microwave Pulses 179
mitigation

versus correction 282-290
versus error suppression 282-290
Model developer 46, 47
multi-gate errors 254
multiple qubits
state vectors, visualizing 111, 112
multi-qubit gates 150, 151
Control-NOT gate (CNOT gate) 151-154
swap gate 158, 159
Toffoli gate 155-157
N
noise model 221
building 255-260
implementing 247-251
non-reversible operator 160-163
NOT gate (X gate) 127
NOT (X) Pauli gate 127-129
NumPy 44
P
Parameterized Quantum Circuit (PQC) 178
pass manager 197
Pauli error 254
Pauli matrix gates 126

NOT (X) Pauli gate 127-129
Y Pauli gate 129-132
Z gate 132-134
periodic algorithm 327
periodic quantum algorithm 328
phase gate 132, 135
Rx gate 145-147
S† (dagger) gate 137-139
S gate 135, 136
T† (dagger) gate 142-145
T gate 140-142
pink noise 281
pip 51
Preset Passmanager
generating 197
used, for optimizing circuits 194
primitives 269
sampler primitive 269-278
Probabilities view 29, 30
pseudorandom number (PSRN) generators 67
Pulse channel 184
Control channel 184
Drive channel 184
Measure channel 184
Pulse libraries 182-184

pulse programs 181
pulses 182
pulse schedules
executing 185-188
generating 185-188
generating, on hardware 179, 180
Q
Qasm simulator 50
Qiskit 165, 221, 327
reference link 183
Qiskit Advocate
reference link 58, 59
Qiskit Advocate program 59
qiskit-aer
reference link 222
Qiskit API documentation
reference link 217
Qiskit APIs 48
Qiskit community 58, 59
contributing to 59
skill set, specializing 59, 60
support, obtaining from 57, 58
Qiskit Developer Certification exam 57
Qiskit documentation

reference link 47
Qiskit GitHub repository
reference link 365
Qiskit metadata package information
reference link 51
Qiskit Patterns 356-358
execute 357
Logical Expression Oracle, implementing 359-362
map 356
optimize 357
post-process 358
Qiskit qsphere 238
Qiskit Runtime options 267, 268
Qiskit Runtime service 265, 266
reference link 267
Qiskit Slack community 60
reference link 366
Qiskitters 58
Qiskit YouTube channel
reference link 366
QSphere 116
Q-sphere view 30, 31
quantum advantage 293, 354
Quantum Algorithm Zoo
reference link 366

quantum amplitude estimation algorithm 327
Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) 266
quantum bit (qubit) 64, 99, 102, 103, 118
implementing, on superconducting system 113
preparing, in superposition state 68-77
representation, visualizing 105-110
state vector, visualizing 103, 105
versus classical bits 100
quantum circuit
building, with classical bit behaviors 31-39
circuit libraries, customizing 175-179
circuit libraries, parameterizing 175-179
circuit properties, obtaining 171-175
components 166-170
creating, with IBM Quantum Composer 31
customizing 166
histogram result, reviewing 40
Layout Selection type 200
noise model 247
optimizing 166
optimizing, with Preset Passmanager 194
passes 199
pass manager 199
transpiling 194-197
quantum computational systems

integrating with classical systems 44
quantum computing 64
quantum entanglement 150
Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT) algorithm 328, 329
implementing 330-339
Quantum gates 115
Quantum Information Science Kit (Qiskit) 43
Anaconda, installing 52
configuring 51
installation, preparing 51
installing 51-54
interacting with 45, 46
organizing 45, 46
reference link 58
reviewing 44, 45
Quantum Instruction Set Architecture (QISA) 357
quantum mechanics 64
quantum solution
generating, with Bernstein-Vazirani (BV) algorithm 319
generating, with Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm 309, 310
quantum support vector machine algorithm 327
quantum system 295
quantum teleportation 95
quantum unitary operators 119, 120
quantum utility 354, 355

qubit gates 115
qubit platforms
neutral atoms 113
Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) 113
Quantum dots 113
superconducting qubits 113
trapped ions 113
R
Rabi oscillations 252
readout errors 254, 279
Readout errors 255
relaxation 279
relaxation time 251
reversibility 118
reversible operations 120
Rx gates 145-147
S
sampler primitive 269-278
schedules 181
scikit-learn 44
SciRate
reference link 367
S† (dagger) gate 137-139

search algorithm 327
secret bit string (shh) 319
session 266, 267
S gate 135, 136
simulators 222
backends, viewing 223, 224
features 222
single-gate errors 254
single-qubit gates 120-122
Hadamard (H) gate 123-125
Identity (I) Pauli gate 126
Pauli matrix gates 126
phase gates 135
Universal U gate 147-150
single-slit experiment 64, 65
Slack workspace 59
reference link 59
spin echo 252
state vector
multiple qubits, visualizing 111, 112
qubit, visualizing 103, 105
statevector simulator 50, 234
circuits, running 234-243
Statevector view 27-29
superconducting system

qubits, implementing 113
super dense coding 95
superposition 66, 67
qubit, preparing 68-77
swap gate 158, 159
T
T† (dagger) gate 142-145
tensor product 111, 150
T gate 140-142
Toffoli gate 155-157
topology 209
Transistor-Transistor Logic (TTL) voltage) 100
transpiler pass 196
U
unitary simulator 50, 243
circuits, running 243-247
universal logic gates 118
Universal U gate 147-150
University of Oxford 297
V
Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) 327, 266
W

Waveform 183
wave-particle duality 66
white noise 281
X
XOR gate 101
XORing 101
Y
Y Pauli gate 129-132
Z
Z gate 132-134

Download a free PDF copy of
this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books
everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of
that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from
your favorite technical books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts,
newsletters, and great free content in your inbox daily.
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1. Scan the QR code or visit the link below:

https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781803244808
2. Submit your proof of purchase.
3. That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email
directly.

