N The Secret to Love
=. Thatlasts 7

H1 NEW YORK TIMES BESTSELLER

Gary Chapman

IN
"5 love

LANGUAGES

Gary Chapman

O 1992, 1995, 2004, 2010, 2015 by
GARY D. CHAPMAN

Al rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form without permission in writing from the publisher, except in

the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles or reviews.

All Scripture quotations, unless otherwise indicated, are taken
from the Holy Bible, New International Version”, NIV*. Copyright
01973, 1978, 1984, 2011 by Biblica, Inc.” Used by permission of

ondervan.com

Zondervan. All rights reserved worldwide. ww"

Edited by Elizabeth Cody Newenhuyse

Cover design: Faceout Studio

Cover photo: Boone Rodriguez (boonerodriguez.com)
Author photo: P. S. Photography

Interior design: Smartt Guys design

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Chapman, Gary D.
The five love languages : the secret to love that lasts / Gary
Chapman.
p.em.

Includes bibliographical references.

ISBN 978-0-8024-1270-6

1. Marriage. 2. Communication in marriage. 3. Love. 1 Title.
HQ734.C4665 2010

646.7'8-—dc22

2009037112

We hope you enjoy this book from Northfield Publishing.
Our goal isto provide high-quality, thought-provoking
books and products that connect truth to your real needs
and challenges. For more information on other books
and products that will help you with all your important

relationships, go to Slovelanguages.com or write to:
Northfield Publishing
820. LasSalle Blvd.
Chicago, IL 60610

13579108642

Printed in the United States of America

To Karolyn,
Shelley, and Derek

THE 5 love LANGUAGESº Collection

The 5 Love Languages for Men
The 5 Love Languages Hardcover Special Edition
The 5 Love Languages of Children
The 5 Love Languages of Teenagers
The 5 Love Languages for Singles

The 5 Love Languages Military Edition

For more books by Gary Chapman,
goto 5lovelanguages.com

Contents

Acknowledgments

1. What Happens to Love After the Wedding?

2. Keeping the Love Tank Full
3. Falling in Love

4. Love Language &1: Words of Affirmation

5. Love Language 42: Quality Time

6. Love Language &3: Receiving Gifts

7. Love Language 4: Acts of Service

8. Love Language *5: Physical Touch

9. Discovering Your Primary Love Language

10. Love Is a Choice

11. Love Makes the Difference
12. Loving the Unlovely

13. A Personal Word

Frequently Asked Questions

The 5 Love Languages Profile for Couples—for Him

The 5 Love Languages Profile for Couples—for Her

Notes

“S love

LANGUAGES

For a free online study guide please visit:

Slovelanguages.com

This group discussion guide is designed to both help
couples apply the concepts from The 5 Love Languages
and stimulate genuine dialogue among study groups.

Acknowledgments

ove begins, or should begin, at home. For me
that means Sam and Grace, Dad and Mom.
Without them I would still be seeking love

instead of writing about it. Home also means Karolyn.
If all wives loved as she does, fewer men would be
looking over the fence. Shelley and Derek are now out
of the nest, exploring new worlds, but I feel secure in
the warmth of their love. I am blessed and grateful.

I am indebted to a host of professionals who have
influenced my concepts of love. Among them are
psychiatrists Ross Campbell and Judson Swihart. For
editorial assistance, I am indebted to Debbie Barr,
Cathy Peterson, and Betsey Newenhuyse. The technical
expertise of Tricia Kube and Don Schmidt made it
possible to meet publication deadlines. Last, and most
important, 1 want to express my gratitude to the
hundreds of couples who, over the years, have shared
the intimate side of their lives with me. This book is a

tribute to their honesty.

What Happens to Love
After the Wedding?

t 30,000 feet, somewhere between Buffalo
and Dallas, he put his magazine in his seat
pocket, turned in my direction, and asked,
“What kind of work do you do?”
“I do marriage counseling and lead marriage
enrichment seminars,” I said matter-of-factly.
“Pve been wanting to ask someone this for a long

time, he said. “What happens to the love after you get
married?”

Relinquishing my hopes of getting a nap, 1 asked,
“What do you mean?”

“Well” he said, “I've been married three times, and
each time, it was wonderful before we got married, but
somehow after the wedding it all fell apart. All the love
Ithought I had for her and the love she seemed to have
for me evaporated. I am a fairly intelligent person. I
operate a successful business, but I don't understand
it”

“How long were you married?” I asked.

“The first one lasted about ten years. The second
time, we were married three years, and the last one,
almost six years.”

“Did your love evaporate immediately after the
wedding, or was it a gradual loss?” Iinquired.

“Well, the second one went wrong from the very
beginning. 1 don't know what happened. I really
thought we loved each other, but the honeymoon was
a disaster, and we never recovered. We only dated six

months. It was a whirlwind romance. It was really

exciting! But after the marriage, it was a battle from
the beginning.

“In my first marriage, we had three or four good
years before the baby came. After the baby was born,
I felt like she gave her attention to the baby and I no
longer mattered. It was as if her one goal in life was to
have a baby, and after the baby, she no longer needed
me”

“Did you tell her that?” I asked.

“Yes, I told her. She said I was crazy. She said I did
not understand the stress of being a twenty-four-hour
nurse. She said I should be more understanding and
help her more. I really tried, but it didn't seem to make
any difference. After that, we just grew further apart.
After a while, there was no love left, just deadness.
Both ofus agreed that the marriage was over.

“My last marriage? I really thought that one would be
different. I had been divorced for three years. We dated
each other for two years. I really thought we knew
what we were doing, and Ithought that perhaps for the
first time I really knew what it meant to love someone.

Igenuinely felt that she loved me.

“After the wedding, I don't think I changed. 1
continued to express love to her as I had before
marriage. I told her how beautiful she was. I told her
how much I loved her. I told her how proud I was
to be her husband. But a few months after marriage,
she started complaining; about petty things at first—
like my not taking the garbage out or not hanging up
my clothes. Later, she went to attacking my character,
telling me she didn't feel she could trust me, accusing
me of not being faithful to her. She became a
totally negative person. Before marriage, she was never
negative. She was one of the most positive people Ihave
ever met—that's one of the things that attracted me to
her. She never complained about anything. Everything
I did was wonderful, but once we were married, it
seemed I could do nothing right. I honestly don't know
what happened. Eventually, I lost my love for her and
began to resent her. She obviously had no love for me.
We agreed there was no benefit to our living together
any longer, so we split.

“That was a year ago. So my question is, What

happens to love after the wedding? Is my experience

common? Is that why we have so many divorces in our
country? I can't believe that it happened to me three
times. And those who don't divorce, do they learn to
live with the emptiness, or does love really stay alive in
some marriages? If so, how?”

The questions my friend seated in 5A was asking are
the questions that thousands of married and divorced
persons are asking today. Some are asking friends,
some are asking counselors and clergy, and some
are asking themselves. Sometimes the answers are
couched in psychological research jargon that is almost
incomprehensible. Sometimes they are couched in
humor and folklore. Most of the jokes and pithy sayings
contain some truth, but they are like offering an
aspirin to a person with cancer.

The desire for romantic love in marriage is deeply
rooted in our psychological makeup. Books abound on
the subject. Television and radio talk shows deal with
it. The Internet is full of advice. So are our parents
and friends and churches. Keeping love alive in our
marriages is serious business.

With all the help available from media experts,

why is it that so few couples seem to have found
the secret to keeping love alive after the wedding?
Why is it that a couple can attend a communication
workshop, hear wonderful ideas on how to enhance
communication, return home, and find themselves
totally unable to implement the communication
patterns demonstrated? How is it that we read
something online on “101 Ways to Express Love to
Your Spouse,” select two or three ways that seem
especially helpful, try them, and our spouse doesn't
even acknowledge our effort? We give up on the other

98 ways and go backto life as usual.

THE TRUTH WE'RE MISSING

The answer to those questions is the purpose of this
book. It is not that the books and articles already
published are not helpful. The problem is that we
have overlooked one fundamental truth: People speak
different love languages.

My academic training is in the area of anthropology.

Therefore, I have studied in the area of linguistics,

which identifies a number of major language groups:
Japanese, Chinese, Spanish, English, Portuguese,
Arabic, Greek, German, French, and so on. Most of
us grow up learning the language of our parents
and siblings, which becomes our primary or native
tongue. Later, we may learn additional languages—
but usually with much more effort. These become
our secondary languages. We speak and understand
best our native language. We feel most comfortable
speaking that language. The more we use a secondary
language, the more comfortable we become conversing
in it. If we speak only our primary language and
encounter someone else who speaks only his or her
primary language, which is different from ours, our
communication will be limited. We must rely on
pointing, grunting, drawing pictures, or acting out
our ideas. We can communicate, but it is awkward.
Language differences are part and parcel of human
culture. If we are to communicate effectively across
cultural lines, we must learn the language of those
with whom we wish to communicate.

In the area of love, it is similar. Your emotional love

language and the language of your spouse may be
as different as Chinese from English. No matter how
hard you try to express love in English, if your spouse
understands only Chinese, you will never understand
how to love each other. My friend on the plane was
speaking the language of affirming words to his third
wife when he said, “I told her how beautiful she was. I
told her Iloved her. Itold her how proud I was to be her
husband.” He was speaking love, and he was sincere,
but she did not understand his language. Perhaps she
was looking for love in his behavior and didn't see it.
Being sincere is not enough. We must be willing to
learn our spouse's primary love language if we are to be
effective communicators of love.

My conclusion after many years of marriage
counseling is that there are five emotional
love languages—five ways that people speak and
understand emotional love. In the field of linguistics,
a language may have numerous dialects or variations.
Similarly, within the five basic emotional love
languages, there are many dialects. The number of

ways to express love within a love language is limited

only by one's imagination. The important thing is to
speak the love language of your spouse.

Seldom do a husband and wife have the same
primary emotional love language. We tend to speak
our primary love language, and we become confused
when our spouse does not understand what we are
communicating. We are expressing our love, but the
message does not come through because we are
speaking what, to them, is a foreign language. Therein
lies the fundamental problem, and it is the purpose of
this book to offer a solution. That is why I dare to write
another book on love. Once we discover the five basic
love languages and understand our own primary love
language, as well as the primary love language of our
spouse, we will then have the needed information to
apply the ideas in the books and articles.

Once you identify and learn to speak your spouse's

primary love language, I believe that you will have
discovered the key to a long-lasting, loving marriage.
Love need not evaporate after the wedding, but in
order to keep it alive, most of us will have to put
forth the effort to learn a secondary love language. We
cannot rely on our native tongue if our spouse does
not understand it. If we want them to feel the love we
are trying to communicate, we must express it in their

primary love language.

YOUR TURN

How does your spouse respond when you try to show
affection?

Keeping the Love Tank Full

ove is the most important word in the English

language—and the most confusing. Both

secular and religious thinkers agree that love

plays a central role in life. Love has a prominent role

in thousands of books, songs, magazines, and movies.

Numerous philosophical and theological systems have
made a prominent place for love.

Psychologists have concluded that the need to feel

loved is a primary human emotional need. For love,

we will climb mountains, cross seas, traverse desert
sands, and endure untold hardships. Without love,
mountains become unclimbable, seas uncrossable,
deserts unbearable, and hardship our lot in life.

If we can agree that the word love permeates human
society, both historically and in the present, we must
also agree that it is a most confusing word. We use it
in a thousand ways. We say, “I love hot dogs,” and in
the next breath, “Ilove my mother” We speak of loving
activities: swimming, skiing, hunting. We love objects:
food, cars, houses. We love animals: dogs, cats, even
pet snails. We love nature: trees, grass, flowers, and
weather. We love people: mother, father, son, daughter,
parents, wives, husbands, friends. We even fall in love
with love.

If all that is not confusing enough, we also use the
word love to explain behavior. “I did it because I love
her” That explanation is given for all kinds of actions.
A politician is involved in an adulterous relationship,
and he calls it love. The preacher, on the other hand,
calls it sin. The wife of an alcoholic picks up the pieces
after her husband's latest episode. She calls it love,

but the psychologist calls it codependency. The parent
indulges all the child's wishes, calling it love. The
family therapist would call it irresponsible parenting.
What is loving behavior?

The purpose of this book is not to eliminate all
confusion surrounding the word love but to focus on
that kind of love that is essential to our emotional
health. Child psychologists affirm that every child has
certain basic emotional needs that must be met if he
is to be emotionally stable. Among those emotional
needs, none is more basic than the need for love and
affection, the need to sense that he or she belongs
and is wanted. With an adequate supply of affection,
the child will likely develop into a responsible adult.
Without that love, he or she will be emotionally and
socially challenged.

Iliked the metaphor the first time I heard it: “Inside
every child is an 'emotional tank' waiting to be filled
with love. When a child really feels loved, he will
develop normally, but when the love tank is empty,
the child will misbehave. Much of the misbehavior

of children is motivated by the cravings of an empty

love tank” I was listening to Dr. Ross Campbell,
a psychiatrist who specialized in the treatment of
children and adolescents.

As 1 listened, I thought of the hundreds of parents
who had paraded the misdeeds of their children
through my office. I had never visualized an empty love
tank inside those children, but I had certainly seen the
results ofit. Their misbehavior was a misguided search
for the love they did not feel. They were seeking love in
allthe wrong places and in allthe wrong ways.

Iremember Ashley, who at thirteen years of age was
being treated for a sexually transmitted disease. Her
parents were crushed. They were angry with Ashley.
They were upset with the school, which they blamed
for teaching her about sex. “Why would she do this?”
they asked.

In my conversation with Ashley, she told me of her
parents' divorce when she was six years old. “I thought
my father left because he didn't love me,” she said.
“When my mother remarried when I was ten, I felt she
now had someone to love her, but I still had no one

to love me. I wanted so much to be loved. I met this

boy at school. He was older than me, but he liked me. 1
couldn't believe it. He was kind to me, and in a while I
really felt he loved me. I didn't want to have sex, but I
wanted to be loved.”

Ashley's “love tank” had been empty for many
years. Her mother and stepfather had provided for her
physical needs but had not realized the deep emotional
struggle raging inside her. They certainly loved Ashley,
and they thought that she felt their love. Not until it
was almost too late did they discover that they were
not speaking Ashley's primary love language.

The emotional need for love, however, is not simply
a childhood phenomenon. That need follows us into
adulthood and into marriage. The “in-love” experience
temporarily meets that need, but it is inevitably a
quick fix and, as we shall learn later, has a limited
and predictable life span. After we come down from
the high of the “in-love” obsession, the emotional need
for love resurfaces because it is fundamental to our
nature. It is at the center of our emotional desires. We
needed love before we “fell in love,” and we will need it

as long as we live.

The need to feel loved by one's spouse is at the heart
of marital desires. A man said to me recently, “What
good is the house, the cars, the place at the beach, or
any of the rest of it if your wife doesn't love you?”
Do you understand what he was really saying? “More
than anything, Iwant to be loved by my wife.” Material
things are no replacement for human, emotional love.
A wife says, “He ignores me all day long and then wants
to jump in bed with me. I hate it” She is not a wife
who hates sex; she is a wife desperately pleading for

emotional love.

OUR CRY FOR LOVE

Something in our nature cries out to be loved by
another. Isolation is devastating to the human psyche.
That is why solitary confinement is considered the
cruelest of punishments. At the heart of humankind's
existence is the desire to be intimate and to be loved
by another. Marriage is designed to meet that need
for intimacy and love. That is why the ancient biblical

writings spoke of the husband and wife becoming “one

flesh” That did not mean that individuals would lose
their identity; it meant that they would enter into each
other's lives in a deep and intimate way.

But if love is important, it is also elusive. I have
listened to many married couples share their secret
pain. Some came to me because the inner ache had
become unbearable. Others came because they realized
that their behavior patterns or the misbehavior of
their spouse was destroying the marriage. Some came
simply to inform me that they no longer wanted to
be married. Their dreams of “living happily ever after”
had been dashed against the hard walls of reality.
Again and again I have heard the words “Our love is
gone; our relationship is dead. We used to feel close,
but not now. We no longer enjoy being with each other.
We don't meet each other's needs.” Their stories bear
testimony that adults as well as children have “love
tanks.”

Could it be that deep inside hurting couples exists
an invisible “emotional love tank” with its gauge
on empty? Could the misbehavior, withdrawal, harsh

words, and critical spirit occur because of that empty

tank? If we could find a way to fill it, could the
marriage be reborn? With a full tank would couples be
able to create an emotional climate where it is possible
to discuss differences and resolve conflicts? Could that
tank be the key that makes marriage work?

Those questions sent me on a long journey. Along
the way, I discovered the simple yet powerful insights
contained in this book. The journey has taken me not
only through years of marriage counseling but into the
hearts and minds of hundreds of couples throughout
America. From Seattle to Miami, couples have invited
me into the inner chamber of their marriages, and we
have talked openly. The illustrations included in this
book are cut from the fabric of real life. Only names
and places are changed to protect the privacy of the
individuals who have spoken so freely.

Tam convinced that keeping the emotional love tank
full is as important to a marriage as maintaining the
proper oil level is to an automobile. Running your
marriage on an empty “love tank” may cost you even
more than trying to drive your car without oil. What

you are about to read has the potential of saving

thousands of marriages and can even enhance the
emotional climate of a good marriage. Whatever the

quality of your marriage now, it can always be better.

WARNING: Understanding the five love languages and
learningto speak the primary love language of your
spouse may radically affect his or her behavior. People
behave differently when their emotional love tanks are
full.

Before we examine the five love languages, however,
we must address one other important but confusing
phenomenon: the euphoric experience of “falling in

love”

YOUR TURN

Onascaleof0-10, how full is your love tank?

Falling in Love

he showed up at my office without an
appointment and asked my assistant if she
could see me for five minutes. 1 had known
Rachel for eighteen years. She was thirty-six and
had never married. From time to time, she had
made appointments with me to discuss a particular
difficulty in one of her dating relationships. She was
by nature a conscientious, caring person, so it was
completely out of character for her to show up at

my office unannounced. I thought, There must be some
terrible crisis for Rachel to come without an appointment.
Itold my assistant to show her in, and I fully expected
to see her burst into tears and tell me some tragic story
as soon as the door was closed. Instead, she practically
skipped into my office, beaming with excitement.

“How are you today, Rachel?” I asked.

“Great!” she said. “T've never been better in my life.
I'm getting married!”

“You are?” I said. “To whom and when?”

“His name is Ben,” she said. “We're getting marriedin
September”

“That's exciting. How long have you been dating?”

“Three weeks. I know it's crazy, Dr. Chapman, after
all the people I have dated and the number of times
I came so close to getting married. I can't believe it
myself, but I know Ben is the one for me. From the first
date, we both knew it. Of course, we didn't talk about
it on the first night, but one week later, he asked me
to marry him. I knew he was going to ask me, and I
knew I was going to say yes. I have never felt this way

before. You know about the relationships that I have

had through the years and the struggles I have had.
In every relationship, something was not right. Inever
felt at peace about marrying any of them, but I know
that Ben is the right one.”

By this time, Rachel was rocking back and forth in
her chair, giggling and saying, “I know it's crazy, but I
am so happy. I have never been this happy in my life”

What has happened to Rachel? She has fallen in love.
In her mind, Ben is the most wonderful man she has
ever met. He is perfect in every way. He will make the
ideal husband. She thinks about him day and night.
The facts that Ben has been married twice before, has
three children, and has had three jobs in the past year
are trivial to Rachel. She's happy, and she is convinced
that she is going to be happy forever with Ben. Sheisin
love.

Most of us enter marriage by way of the “inlove” experience. We meet someone whose physical
characteristics and personality traits create enough
electrical shock to trigger our “love alert” system. The
bells go off, and we set in motion the process of getting

to know the person. The first step may be sharing a

hamburger or steak, depending on our budget, but our
real interest is not in the food. We are on a quest to
discover love. “Could this warm, tingly feeling I have
inside be the 'real thing?”

Sometimes we lose the tingles on the first date. We
find out that he spends time on crackpot websites or
she attended six colleges, and the tingles run right
out our toes; we want no more hamburgers with
them. Other times, however, the tingles are stronger
after the burger than before. We arrange for a few
more “together” experiences, and before long the level
of intensity has increased to the point where we
find ourselves saying, “I think I'm falling in love”
Eventually we are convinced that it is the “real thing,”
and we tell the other person, hoping the feeling is
reciprocal. Ifit isn't, things cool off a bit or we redouble
our efforts to impress, and eventually win the love of,
our beloved. When it is reciprocal, we start talking
about marriage because everyone agrees that being “in

love” is the necessary foundation for a good marriage.

THE ANTEROOM OF HEAVEN

Atits peak, the “in-love” experience is euphoric. We are
emotionally obsessed with each other. We go to sleep
thinking of one another. When we rise, that person is
the first thought on our minds. We long to be together.
Spending time together is like playing in the anteroom
of heaven. When we hold hands, it seems as if our
blood flows together. We could kiss forever if we didn't
have to go to school or work. When we embrace, time
seemstostop...

The person who is “in love”—we'll call her Jen—has
the illusion that her beloved is perfect. Her best friend
can see the flaws—it bothers her how he talks to Jen
sometimes—but Jen won't listen. Her mother, noting
the young man seems unable to hold a steady job, keeps
her concerns to herself but asks polite questions about
“Ryan's plans.”

Our dreams before marriage are of marital bliss: “We
are going to make each other supremely happy. Other
couples may argue and fight, but not us. We love each

other” Of course, we are not totally naive. We know
intellectually that we will eventually have differences.
But we are certain that we will discuss those
differences openly; one of us will always be willing to
make concessions, and we will reach agreement. It's
hard to believe anything else when you are in love.

We have been led to believe that if we are really
in love, it will last forever. We will always have
the wonderful feelings that we have at this moment.
Nothing could ever come between us. Nothing will
ever overcome our love for each other. We are caught
up in the beauty and charm of the other's personality.
Our love is the most wonderful thing we have ever
experienced. We observe that some married couples
seem to have lost that feeling, but it will never happen
to us. “Maybe they didn't have the real thing” we
reason.

Unfortunately, the eternality of the “in-love”
experience is fiction, not fact. The late psychologist Dr.
Dorothy Tennov conducted long-range studies on the
in-love phenomenon. After studying scores of couples,

she concluded that the average life span of a romantic

obsession is two years. If it is a secretive love affair,
it may last a little longer. Eventually, however, we all
descend from the clouds and plant our feet on earth
again. Our eyes are opened, and we see the warts of the
other person. Her endearing “quirks” are now merely
annoying. His sharp sense of humor now wounds.
Those little bumps we overlooked when we were in

love now become huge mountains.

REALITY INTRUDES

Welcome to the real world of marriage, where hairs
are always on the sink and little white spots cover the
mirror, where discussions center not on “where should
we eat tonight?” but “why didn't you get milk?” It is
a world where bills and in-laws and jobs and children
all clamor for our attention, a world where routine
and resentment can silently eat away at the love we
once had. In this world, a look can hurt and a word
can crush. Intimate lovers can become enemies, and
marriage a battlefield.

What happened to the “in-love” experience? Alas, it

was but an illusion by which we were tricked into
signing our names on the dotted line, for better or
for worse. No wonder so many have come to curse
marriage and the partner whom they once loved. After
all, if we were deceived, we have a right to be angry. Did
we really have the “real” thing? I think so. The problem
was faulty information.

The bad information was the idea that the “in-love”
obsession would last forever. We should have known
better. A casual observation should have taught us
that if people remained obsessed, we would all be
in serious trouble. The shock waves would rumble
through business, industry, church, education, and the
rest of society. Why? Because people who are “in love”
lose interest in other pursuits. That is why we call it
“obsession” The college student who falls head over
heels in love sees his grades tumbling. It is difficult
to study when you are in love. Tomorrow you have a
test on the War of 1812, but who cares about the War
of 1812? When you're in love, everything else seems
irrelevant. A man said to me, “Dr. Chapman, my job is

disintegrating.”

“What do you mean?” I asked.

“I met this girl, fell in love, and I can't get a thing
done. I can't keep my mind on my job. I spend my day
dreaming about her”

The euphoria of the “in-love” state gives us the
illusion that we have an intimate relationship. We
feel that we belong to each other. We believe we can
conquer all problems. We feel altruistic toward each
other. As one young man said about his fiancée, “I can't
conceive of doing anything to hurt her. My only desire
is to make her happy. I would do anything to make
her happy.” Such obsession gives us the false sense that
our egocentric attitudes have been eradicated and we
have become sort of a Mother Teresa, willing to give
anything for the benefit of our lover. The reason we can
do that so freely is that we sincerely believe that our
lover feels the same way toward us. We believe that she
is committed to meeting our needs, that he loves us as
much as we love him and would never do anything to
hurtus.

That thinking is always fanciful. Not that we are
insincere in what we think and feel, but we are

unrealistic. We fail to reckon with the reality of
human nature. By nature, we are egocentric. Our world
revolves around us. None of us is totally altruistic. The
euphoria of the “in-love” experience only gives us that
illusion.

Once the experience of falling in love has run
its natural course (remember, the average in-love
experience lasts two years), we will return to the world
of reality and begin to assert ourselves. He will express
his desires, but his desires will be different from hers.
He wants sex, but she is too tired. He dreams of buying
a new car, but she flatly says, “We can't afford it” She
would like to visit her parents, but he says, “I don't
like spending so much time with your family” Little
by little, the illusion of intimacy evaporates, and the
individual desires, emotions, thoughts, and behavior
patterns assert themselves. They are two individuals.
Their minds have not melded together, and their
emotions mingled only briefly in the ocean of love.
Now the waves of reality begin to separate them. They
fall out of love, and at that point either they withdraw,

separate, divorce, and set off in search of a new in-love

experience, or they begin the hard work of learning
to love each other without the euphoria of the in-love
obsession.

Some couples believe that the end of the “in-love”
experience means they have only two options: resign
themselves to a life of misery with their spouse; or
jump ship and try again. Our generation has opted
for the latter, whereas an earlier generation often
chose the former. Before we automatically conclude
that we have made the better choice, perhaps we
should examine the data. The divorce rate for second
marriages is higher than the divorce rate of first
marriages. The divorce rate in third marriages is higher
still. Apparently the prospect of a happier marriage the
second and third time around is not substantial.

FROM “IN LOVE” TO REAL LOVE

Research seems to indicate that there is a third
and better alternative: We can recognize the in-love
experience for what it was—a temporary emotional

high—and now pursue “real love” with our spouse.

That kind of love is emotional in nature but not
obsessional. It is a love that unites reason and emotion.
It involves an act of the will and requires discipline,
and it recognizes the need for personal growth. Our
most basic emotional need is not to fallin love but to be
genuinely loved by another, to know a love that grows
out of reason and choice, not instinct. Ineed to be loved
by someone who chooses to love me, who sees in me
something worth loving.

That kind of love requires effort and discipline. It is
the choice to expend energy in an effort to benefit the
other person, knowing that if his or her life is enriched
by your effort, you too will find a sense of satisfaction
—the satisfaction of having genuinely loved another.
It does not require the euphoria of the “in-love”
experience. In fact, true love cannot begin until the “inlove” experience has run its course.

We cannot take credit for the kind and generous
things we do while under the influence of “the
obsession.” We are pushed and carried along by
an instinctual force that goes beyond our normal

behavior patterns. But if, once we return to the real

world of human choice, we choose to be kind and
generous, that is real love.

The emotional need for love must be met if we are
to have emotional health. Married adults long to feel
affection and love from their spouses. We feel secure
when we are assured that our mate accepts us, wants
us, and is committed to our well-being. During the
“in-love” stage, we felt all of those emotions. It was
heavenly while it lasted. Our mistake was in thinking it
would last forever.

But that obsession was not meant to last forever. In
the textbook of marriage, it is but the introduction.
The heart of the book is rational, volitional love. That is
the kind of love to which the sages have always called
us. It is intentional.

That is good news to the married couple who have
lost all of their “in-love” feelings. If love is a choice,
then they have the capacity to love after the “in-love”
obsession has died and they have returned to the real
world. That kind of love begins with an attitude—
a way of thinking. Love is the attitude that says, “

am married to you, and I choose to look out for your

interests.” Then the one who chooses to love will find
appropriate ways to express that decision.

“But it seems so sterile,” some may contend. “Love as
an attitude with appropriate behavior? Where are the
shooting stars, the balloons, the deep emotions? What
about the spirit of anticipation, the twinkle of the eye,
the electricity of a kiss, the excitement of sex? What
about the emotional security of knowing that I am
number one in his/her mind?” That is what this bookis
all about. How do we meet each other's deep, emotional
need to feel loved? If we can learn that and choose to
do it, then the love we share will be exciting beyond
anything we ever felt when we were infatuated.

For many years now, I have discussed the five
emotional love languages in my marriage seminars
and in private counseling sessions. Thousands of
couples will attest to the validity of what you are
about to read. My files are filled with letters from
people whom 1 have never met, saying, “A friend
loaned me one of your DVDs on love languages,
and it has revolutionized our marriage. We had

struggled for years trying to love each other, but

our efforts had missed each other emotionally. Now
that we are speaking the appropriate love languages,
the emotional climate of our marriage has radically
improved”

When your spouse's emotional love tank is full and
he feels secure in your love, the whole world looks
bright and your spouse will move out to reach his
highest potential in life. But when the love tank is
empty and he feels used but not loved, the whole world
looks dark and he will likely never reach his potential
for good in the world. In the next five chapters, 1 will
explain the five emotional love languages and then,

in chapter 9, illustrate how discovering your spouse's

primary love language can make your efforts at love

most productive.

YOUR TURN

Can you pinpoint a time in your marriage when “reality”
set in? How did this affect your relationship, for better or

worse?



LOVE LANGUAGE & 1
Words of Afjirmation

ark Twain once said, “I can live for two

months on a good compliment” If we

take Twain literally, six compliments a

year would have kept his emotional love tank at the
operational level. Your spouse will probably need more.
One way to express love emotionally is to use words
that build up. Solomon, author of the ancient Hebrew

Wisdom Literature, wrote, “The tongue has the power
of life and death.” Many couples have never learned
the tremendous power of verbally affirming each
other.

Verbal compliments, or words of appreciation, are
powerful communicators of love. They are best
expressed in simple, straightforward statements of

affirmation, such as:

“You look sharp in that suit.”

“Do you ever look incredible in that dress! Wow!”

“I really like how you're always on time to pick me up

at work”

“Thanks for getting the babysitter lined up tonight. 1

want you to know I don't take that for granted.”

“You can always make me laugh.”

What would happen to the emotional climate of a
marriage if the husband and wife heard such words of
affirmation regularly?

Several years ago, I was sitting in my office with my
door open. A lady walking down the hall said, “Have
you got a minute?”

“Sure, come in.”

She sat down and said, “Dr. Chapman, I've got a
problem. I can't get my husband to paint our bedroom.
I have been after him for nine months. I have tried
everything I know, and I can't get him to paint it.”

My first thought was, Lady, you are at the wrong place.
Iamnota paint contractor. But I said, “Tell me about it.”

She said, “Well, last Saturday was a good example.
You remember how pretty it was? Do you know what
my husband did all day long? He was cleaning out his
computer files.”

“So what did you do?”

“I went in there and said, 'Dan, I don't understand
you. Today would have been a perfect day to paint
the bedroom, and here you are working on your

computer.

“So did he paint the bedroom?” Iinquired.

“No. It's still not painted. I don't know what to do.”

“Let me ask you a question,” I said. “Are you opposed
to computers?”

“No, but I want the bedroom painted.”

“Are you certain that your husband knows that you
want the bedroom painted?”

“I know he does,” she said. “I have been after him for
nine months.”

“Let me ask you one more question. Does your
husband ever do anything good?”

“Like what?”

“Oh, like taking the garbage out, or putting gas in the
car, or paying the electric bill, or running to the storeto
get milk and toilet paper?”

“Yes, she said, “he does some of those things.”

“Then I have two suggestions. One, don't ever
mention painting the bedroom again.” I repeated,
“Don't ever mention it again”

“I don't see how that's going to help,” she said.

“Look, you just told me that he knows that you
want the bedroom painted. You don't have to tell him

anymore. He already knows. The second suggestion I
have is that the next time your husband does anything
good, give him a verbal compliment. If he takes the
garbage out, say, 'Dan, I want you to know that I really
appreciate your taking the garbage out Don't say,
“About time you took the garbage out. The flies were
going to carry it out for you. If you see him paying
the electric bill, put your hand on his shoulder and say,
'Dan, I really appreciate your paying the electric bill. I
hear there are husbands who don't do that, and I want
you to know how much I appreciate it! Or, 1 really
appreciated you running out to the store when I had to
finish that project Every time he does anything good,
give him a verbal compliment.”

“I don't see how that's going to get the bedroom
painted”

Isaid, “You asked for my advice. You have it. It's free.”

She wasn't very happy with me when she left. Three
weeks later, however, she came back to my office
and said, “It worked!” She had learned that verbal
compliments are far greater motivators than nagging
words.

I am not suggesting verbal flattery in order to get
your spouse to do something you want. The object
of love is not getting something you want but doing
something for the well-being of the one you love. It is
a fact, however, that when we receive affirming words
we are far more likely to be motivated to reciprocate

and do something our spouse desires.

ENCOURAGING WORDS

Giving verbal compliments is only one way to express
words of affirmation to your spouse. Another dialect
is encouraging words. The word encourage means “to
inspire courage” All of us have areas in which we feel
insecure. We lack courage, and that lack of courage
often hinders us from accomplishing the positive
things that we would like to do. The latent potential
within your spouse in his or her areas of insecurity
may await your encouraging words.

Allison had always liked to write. Late in her college
career, she took a few courses in journalism. She

quickly realized that her excitement about writing

exceeded her interest in history, which had been her
academic major. It was too late to change majors, but
after college and especially before the first baby, she
wrote several articles. She submitted one article to a
magazine, but when she received a rejection slip, she
never had the courage to submit another. Now that
the children were older and she had more time to
contemplate, Allison was again writing.

Keith, Allison's husband, had paid little attention to
Allison's writing in the early days of their marriage. He
was busy with his own profession and trying to make a
place for himself in that world. In time, however, Keith
had realized that life's deepest meaning is not found in
accomplishments but in relationships. He had learned
to give more attention to Allison and her interests. So
it was quite natural one night for him to pick up one
of Allison's articles and read it. When he finished, he
went into the den where Allison was reading a book.
With great enthusiasm, he said, “I hate to interrupt
your reading, but I have to tell you this. I just finished
reading your article on 'Making the Most of the
Holidays. Allison, you're a really good writer. This stuff

ought to be published! You write clearly. Your words
paint pictures that I can visualize. You have great ideas.
You have to submit this to some magazines.”

“Do you really think so?” Allison asked hesitantly.

“Iknow so,” Keith said. “I'm telling you, this is good.”

When Keith left the room, Allison did not resume her
reading. With the closed book in her lap, she dreamed
for thirty minutes about what Keith had said. She
wondered if others would view her writing the same
way he did. She remembered the rejection slip she had
received years ago, but she reasoned that she was a
different person now. Her writing was better. She had
had more experiences. Before she left the chair to get a
drink of water, Allison had made a decision. She would
submit her articles to some magazines. She would see
ifthey could be published.

Keith's encouraging words were spoken many years
ago. Allison has had numerous articles published since
then and now has a book contract. She is an excellent
writer, but it took the encouraging words from her
husband to inspire her to take the first step in the

arduous process of getting an article published.

Perhaps your spouse has untapped potential in one
or more areas of life. That potential may be awaiting
your encouraging words. Perhaps she needs to enroll
in a course to develop that potential. Maybe he needs
to meet some people who have succeeded in that area,
who can give him insight on the next step he needs
to take. Your words may give your spouse the courage
necessary to take that first step.

Please note that I am not talking about pressuring
your spouse to do something that you want. I am
talking about encouraging him to develop an interest
that he already has. For example, a wife might pressure
her husband to look for a more lucrative job. The
wife thinks she's encouraging her spouse, but to him
it sounds more like condemnation. But if he has the
desire and motivation to seek a better position, her
words will bolster his resolve. Until he has that desire,
her words will come across as judgmental and guilt
inducing. They express not love but rejection.

If, however, he says, “You know, I've been thinking
about starting a handyman business on the side,”

then she has an opportunity to give words of

encouragement. Encouraging words would sound like
this. “If you decide to do that, I can tell you one thing.
You will be a success. That's one of the things I like
about you. When you set your mind to something, you
do it. If that's what you want to do, I will certainly do
everything I can to help you.” Such words may give
him the courage to start drawing up a list of potential
clients.

Encouragement requires empathy and seeing the
world from your spouse's perspective. We must first
learn what is important to our spouse. Only then can
we give encouragement. With verbal encouragement,
we are trying to communicate, “I know. I care. Iam
with you. How can I help?” We are trying to show that
we believe in him and in his abilities. We are giving
credit and praise.

Most of us have more potential than we will ever
develop. What holds us back is often courage. A
loving spouse can supply that all-important catalyst.
Of course, encouraging words may be difficult for you
to speak. It may not be your primary love language. If

you have a pattern of critical and condemning words

it may take great effort for you to learn this second
language, but I can assure you that it will be worth the
effort.

KIND WORDS

Love is kind. If then we are to communicate love
verbally, we must use kind words. That has to do with
the way we speak. The same sentence can have two
different meanings, depending on how you say it. The
statement “I love you,” when said with kindness and
tenderness, can be a genuine expression of love. But
what about “I love you?” The question mark changes
the whole meaning of those three words. Sometimes
our words say one thing, but our tone of voice says
another. We are sending double messages. Our spouse
will usually interpret our message based on our tone of
voice, not the words we use.

“I would be delighted to wash dishes tonight,” said
in a snarling tone will not be received as an expression
of love. On the other hand, we can share pain, sadness,

and even anger in a kind manner, and that will be an

expression of love. “I felt disappointed and hurt that
you didn't offer to help me this evening, said with
gentle directness, can be an expression of love. The
person speaking wants to be known by her spouse.
She is taking steps to build intimacy by sharing her
feelings. She is asking for an opportunity to discuss
a hurt in order to find healing. The same words
expressed with a loud, harsh voice will be not am
expression of love but an expression of condemnation
and judgment.

The manner in which we speak is exceedingly
important. An ancient sage once said, “A soft answer
turns away anger” When your spouse is angry and
upset and lashing out words of heat, if you choose
to be loving, you will not reciprocate with additional
heat but with a soft voice. You will receive what he
is saying as information about his emotional feelings.
You will let him tell you of his hurt, anger, and
perception of events. You will seek to put yourself in
his shoes and see the event through his eyes and then
express softly and kindly your understanding of why

he feels that way. If you have wronged him, you will

be willing to confess the wrong and ask forgiveness. If
your motivation is different from what he is reading,
you will be able to explain your motivation kindly. You
will seek understanding and reconciliation, and not to
prove your own perception as the only logical way to
interpret what has happened. That is mature love—
love to which we aspire if we seek a growing marriage.

Love doesn't keep a score of wrongs. Love doesn't
bring up past failures. None of us is perfect. In
marriage we do not always do the best or right thing.
We have sometimes done and said hurtful things to
our spouses. We cannot erase the past. We can only
confess it and agree that it was wrong. We can ask
for forgiveness and try to act differently in the future.
Having confessed my failure and asked forgiveness,
I can do nothing more to mitigate the hurt it may
have caused my spouse. When I have been wronged
by my spouse and she has painfully confessed it and
requested forgiveness, I have the option of justice or
forgiveness. IfI choose justice and seek to pay her back
or make her pay for her wrongdoing, I am making

myself the judge and she the felon. Intimacy becomes

impossible. If, however, I choose to forgive, intimacy
can be restored. Forgiveness is the way of love.

I am amazed by how many individuals mess up
every new day with yesterday. They insist on bringing
into today the failures of yesterday, and in so doing,
they pollute a potentially wonderful present. “I can't
believe you did it. I don't think T'll ever forget it. You
can't possibly know how much you hurt me. I don't
know how you can sit there so smugly after you treated
me that way. You ought to be crawling on your knees,
begging me for forgiveness. I don't know if I can ever
forgive you” Those are not the words of love but of
bitterness and resentment and revenge.

The best thing we can do with the failures of
the past is to let them be history. Yes, it happened.
Certainly it hurt. And it may still hurt, but he has
acknowledged his failure and asked your forgiveness.
We cannot erase the past, but we can accept it as
history. We can choose to live today free from the
failures of yesterday. Forgiveness is not a feeling; it is
a commitment. It is a choice to show mercy, not to

hold the offense up against the offender. Forgiveness

is an expression of love. “I love you. I care about you,
and I choose to forgive you. Even though my feelings
of hurt may linger, 1 will not allow what has happened
to come between us. I hope that we can learn from
this experience. You are not a failure because you
have failed. You are my spouse, and together we will
go on from here.” Those are the words of affirmation

expressed in the dialect of kind words.

HUMBLE WORDS

Love makes requests, not demands. When I demand
things from my spouse, I become a parent and she the
child. It is the parent who tells the three-year-old what
he ought to do and, in fact, what he must do. That
is necessary because the three-year-old does not yet
know how to navigate in the treacherous waters of life.
In marriage, however, we are equal, adult partners. We
are not perfect to be sure, but we are adults and we are
partners. If we are to develop an intimate relationship,
we need to know each other's desires. If we wish to love

each other, we need to know what the other person

wants.

The way we express those desires, however, is allimportant. If they come across as demands, we have
erased the possibility of intimacy and will drive our
spouse away. If, however, we make our needs and
desires known in the form of a request, we are giving
guidance, not ultimatums. The husband who says,
“Could you make that good pasta one of these nights?”
is giving his wife guidance on how to love him and
thus build intimacy. On the other hand, the husband
who says, “Can't we ever have a decent meal around
here?” is being whiny, is making a demand, and his
wife is likely to fire back, “Okay, you cook!” The wife
who says, “Do you think it will be possible for you to
clean the gutters this weekend?” is expressing love by
making a request. But the wife who says, “If you don't
get those gutters cleaned out soon, they are going to
fall off the house. They already have trees growing
out of them!” has ceased to love and has become a
domineering spouse.

When you make a request of your spouse, you

are affirming his or her worth and abilities. You are

in essence indicating that she has something or can
do something that is meaningful and worthwhile to
you. When, however, you make demands, you have
become not a lover but a tyrant. Your spouse will feel
not affirmed but belittled. A request introduces the
element of choice. Your mate may choose to respond
to your request or to deny it, because love is always
a choice. That's what makes it meaningful. To know
that my spouse loves me enough to respond to one of
my requests communicates emotionally that she cares
about me, respects me, admires me, and wants to do
something to please me.

We cannot get emotional love by way of demand.
My spouse may in fact comply with my demands, but
it is not an expression of love. It is an act of fear
or guilt or some other emotion, but not love. Thus, a
request creates the possibility for an expression oflove,

whereas a demand suffocates that possibility.

NOTEBOOKS—AND MORE

Words of affirmation are one of the five basic love

languages. Within that language, however, there are
many dialects. We have discussed a few already, and
there are many more. Entire volumes and numerous
articles have been written on these dialects. All of the
dialects have in common the use of words to affirm
one's spouse. Psychologist William James said that
possibly the deepest human need is the need to feel
appreciated. Words of affirmation will meet that need
in many individuals. If you are not a man or woman
of words, if it is not your primary love language but
you think it may be the love language of your spouse,
let me suggest that you keep a notebook titled “Words
of Affirmation.” When you read an article or book on
love, record the words of affirmation you find. When
you hear a lecture on love or you overhear a friend
saying something positive about another person, write
it down. In time, you will collect quite a list of words to
use in communicating love to your spouse.

You may also want to try giving indirect words of
affirmation—that is, saying positive things about your
spouse when he or she is not present. Eventually,

someone will tell your spouse, and you will get full

credit for love. Tell your wife's mother how great your
wife is. When her mother tells her what you said, it
will be amplified, and you will get even more credit.
Also affirm your spouse in front of others when he or
she is present. When you are given public honor for an
accomplishment, be sure to share the credit with your
spouse. You may also try your hand at writing words
of affirmation. Written words have the benefit of being
read over and over again.

I learned an important lesson about words of
affirmation and love languages years ago in Little Rock,
Arkansas, when I visited Mark and Andrea in their
home on a beautiful spring day. The setting was idyllic
—on the outside. Once inside, however, I discovered
the truth. Their marriage was in shambles. Twelve
years and two children after the wedding day, they
wondered why they had married in the first place.
They seemed to disagree on everything. The only thing
they really agreed on was that they both loved the
children.

Asthe story unfolded, my observation was that Mark

was a workaholic who had little time left over for

Andrea. Andrea worked part-time, mainly to get out
of the house. Their method of coping was withdrawal.
They tried to put distance between themselves so that
their conflicts would not seem as large. But the gauge
on both love tanks read “empty”

They told me that they had been going for marriage
counseling but didn't seem to be making much
progress. They were attending my marriage seminar,
and I was leaving town the next day. This would likely
be my only encounter with them, so I decided to put
everything on the table.

I spent an hour with each of them separately. 1
listened intently to both stories. I discovered that in
spite of the emptiness of their relationship and their
many disagreements, they appreciated certain things
about each other. Mark acknowledged Andrea was a
“good mother” But, he continued, “there is simply no
affection coming from her. 1 work my tail off and she
doesn't appreciate it.” In my conversation with Andrea,
she agreed that Mark was an excellent provider. “But,”
she complained, “he does nothing around the house

to help me, and he never has time for me. What's the

use of having nice things if you don't ever get to enjoy
them together?”

With that information, I decided to focus my advice
by making only one suggestion to each of them. I told
Mark and Andrea separately that each one held the
key to changing the emotional climate of the marriage.
“That key” I said, “is to express verbal appreciation
for the things you like about the other person and,
for the moment, suspending your complaints about
the things you do not like.” We reviewed the positive
comments they had already made about each other,
and I helped each of them write a list of those positive
traits. Mark's list focused on Andrea's activities with
her children, home, and church. Andrea's list focused
on Mark's hard work and financial provision of the
family. We made the lists as specific as possible.
Andrea's list looked like this:

- Heis aggressive in his work.

- He has received several promotions through the

years.

- He'sa good financial manager.

- Heis always thinking of ways to improve his

productivity.
- He's generous with finances and agrees I can use

the money from my job any way I desire.

Mark's list looked like this:

- She keeps our house clean and orderly.

- She helps the kids with their homework.

- She cooks dinner about three days a week.

- She teaches first-grade Sunday school.

- She chauffeurs the children to all their activities.

I suggested that they add to the lists things they
noticed in the weeks ahead. I also suggested that
twice a week, they select one positive trait and express
verbal appreciation for it to the spouse. I gave one
further guideline. Itold Andrea that if Mark happened
to give her a compliment, she was not to give him a
compliment at the same time, but rather, she should
simply receive it and say, “Thank you for saying that.”
I told Mark the same thing. I encouraged them to do

that every week for two months, and if they found it

helpful, they could continue. If the experiment did not
help the emotional climate of the marriage, then they
could write it off as another failed attempt.

The next day, I got on the plane and returned home.
I made a note to follow up with them two months
later to see what had happened. When I called them
in midsummer, I asked to speak to each of them
individually. 1 was amazed to find that Mark's attitude
had taken a giant step forward. He had guessed that
I had given Andrea the same advice I had given him,
but that was all right. He loved it. She was expressing
appreciation for his hard work and his provision for
the family. “She has actually made me feel like a man
again. We've got a ways to go, Dr. Chapman, but I really
believe we are on the road.”

When I talked to Andrea, however, I found that
she had only taken a baby step forward. She said, “Tt
has improved some, Dr. Chapman. Mark is giving me
verbal compliments as you suggested, and I guess he is
sincere. But he's still not spending any time with me.

He is still so busy at work that we never have time

together”

As I listened to Andrea, I knew that I had made a
significant discovery. The love language of one person
is not necessarily the love language of another. It was
obvious that Mark's primary love language was words
of affirmation. He was a hard worker, and he enjoyed
his work, but what he wanted most from his wife was
expressions of appreciation for his work. That pattern
was probably set in childhood, and the need for verbal
affirmation was no less important in his adult life.
Andrea, on the other hand, was emotionally crying out
for something else. That brings us to love language

number two.

YOUR TURN

What would you most like to hear your spouse say to you?

1. To remind yourself that “Words of Affirmation”
is your spouse's primary love language, print the
following on a card and put it on a mirror or other

place where you will see it daily:
Words are important!
Words are important!
Words are important!

2. For one week, keep a written record of all the words
of affirmation you give your spouse each day. You
might be surprised how well (or how poorly) you are
speaking words of affirmation.

3. Set a goalto give your spouse a different
compliment each day for one month. If “an apple a
day keeps the doctor away,” maybe a compliment
a day will keep the counselor away. (You may want
to record these compliments also, so you will not

duplicate the statements.)

4. Learn to say “Ilove you” or other expressions of

affirmation in a couple of different languages.

5. Compliment your spouse in the presence of his
parents or friends. You will get double credit: Your
spouse will feel loved and the parents will feel lucky

to have such a great son-in-law or daughter-in-law.

6. Look for your spouse's strengths and tellher how
much you appreciate those strengths. Be specific:
“Ilike how you reach out to people at church who
don't seem to have anyone to talk to.” Or: “You're
really keeping up with the job search. Iknow it'll pay
off”

7. Occasionally email or text a note of affirmation
during the day or when one of you is traveling. Or if
you know your spouse is having a hard day, send a

linkto a funny website.

8. Thank your mate for something they do routinely

and wouldn't expect to be complimented for.

put Y 7)
9) Ma

LOVE LANGUAGE &2
Quality Time

should have picked up on Andrea's primary love
language from the beginning. What was she
saying on that spring night when I visited her and
Mark in Little Rock? “Mark doesn't spend any time with
me. What good are all our things if we don't ever enjoy
them together?” What was her desire? Quality time
with Mark. She wanted his attention. She wanted him

to focus on her, to give her time, to do things with her.

By “quality time,” I mean giving someone your
undivided attention. I don't mean sitting on the couch
watching television together. When you spend time
that way, Netflix or HBO has your attention—not your
spouse. What I mean is sitting on the couch with the
TV off, looking at each other and talking, devices put
away, giving each other your undivided attention. It
means taking a walk, just the two of you, or going out
to eat and looking at each other and talking.

Time is a precious commodity. We all have multiple
demands on our time, yet each of us has the exact
same hours in a day. We can make the most of those
hours by committing some of them to our spouse. If
your mate's primary love language is quality time, she
simply wants you, being with her, spending time.

Provided it's the right kind of time.

Have you ever noticed that in a restaurant, you can
almost always tell the difference between a dating
couple and a married couple? Dating couples look at

each other and talk. Married couples sit there and gaze

around the restaurant. You'd think they went there to
eat!

When I sit with my wife and give her twenty
minutes of my undivided attention and she does the
same for me, we are giving each other twenty minutes
of life. We will never have those twenty minutes again;
we are giving our lives to each other. It is a powerful
emotional communicator of love.

One medicine cannot cure all diseases. In my advice
to Andrea and Mark, I made a serious mistake. 1
assumed that words of affirmation would mean as
much to her as they would to him. I had hoped that if
each of them would give adequate verbal affirmation,
the emotional climate would change, and both of
them would begin to feel loved. It worked for Mark.
He began to feel more positive about Andrea, sensing
her genuine appreciation for his hard work, but it
had not worked as well for Andrea, because words of
affirmation was not her primary love language. Her
language was quality time.

I called Mark, who told me Andrea was still not very
happy. “I think I know why” I said. “The problem is

that I suggested the wrong love language.”

Mark hadn't the foggiest idea what I meant. 1
explained that what makes one person feel loved
emotionally is not always the thing that makes
another person feel loved emotionally.

He agreed that his language was words of
affirmation. He told me how much that had meant
to him as a boy and how good he felt when his
wife expressed appreciation for the things he did. I
explained that Andrea's language was not words of
affirmation but quality time. I explained the concept of
giving someone your undivided attention, not talking
to her while you watch sports or read texts but looking
into her eyes, giving her your full attention, doing
something with her that she enjoys doing and doing
it wholeheartedly. “Like going to the symphony with
her he said. I could tell the lights were coming on in
Little Rock.

“Dr. Chapman, that's what she has always
complained about. I didn't do things with her; I didn't
spend any time with her. She'd always say, “We used to

go places and do things before we were married, but

now, you're too busy. That's her love language all right;
no question about it. But what am I gonna do? My job is
so demanding.”

“Tell me about it,” I said.

For the next ten minutes, he gave me the history
of his climb up the organizational ladder, of how
hard he had worked, and how proud he was of his
accomplishments. He told me of his dreams for the
future and that he knew that within the next five years,
he would be where he wanted to be.

“Do you want to be there alone, or do you want to be
there with Andrea and the children?” I asked.

“I want her to be with me, Dr. Chapman. I want her
to enjoy it with me. That's why it always hurts so much
when she criticizes me for spending time on the job. I
am doing it for us. I wanted her to be a part of it, but
she's always so negative.”

“Are you beginning to see why she was so negative,
Mark?” I asked. “Her love language is quality time. You
have given her so little time that her love tank is empty.
She doesn't feel secure in your love. Therefore she has

lashed out at what was taking your time in her mind

—your job. She doesn't really hate your job. She hates
the fact that she feels so little love coming from you.
There's only one answer, Mark, and it's costly. You have
to make time for Andrea. You have to love her in the
right love language.”

“I know you are right, Dr. Chapman. Where do I
begin”

1 asked Mark if he had his legal pad handy—the
same pad on which he had listed positive things about
Andrea.

“It's right here”

“Good. We're going to make another list. What are
some things that you know Andrea would like you to
do with her? Things she has mentioned through the

years.” Here is Mark's list:

- Spend a weekend in the mountains (sometimes

with the kids and sometimes just the two of us).

* Meet her for lunch (at a nice restaurant or

sometimes just at Panera).

* When I come home at night, sit down and talk with

her about my day and listen as she tells me about

her day. (She doesn't want me to watch TV while we

are trying to talk.)

- Spend time talking with the children about their

school experiences.
- Spend time playing games with the children.

* Goona picnic with her and the kids on Saturday

and don't complain about the ants and the flies.
- Take a vacation with the family at least once a year.

* Go walking with her and talk as we walk.

When Mark's list was finished, I said, “You know
what Iam going to suggest, don't you, Mark?”

“Do them,” he said.

“That's right, one a week for the next two months.
Where will you find the time? You will make it. You are
a wise man, I continued. “You would not be where you
areif you were not a good decision maker. You have the
ability to plan your life and to include Andrea in your
plans”

“Iknow, he said. “ can do it.”

“And, Mark, this does not have to diminish your

vocational goals. It just means that when you get to the
top, Andrea and the children will be with you.”

“That's what I want more than anything,” Mark said
with feeling.

The years have come and gone. Andrea and Mark
have had ups and downs, but the important thing is
that they have done it all together. The children have
left the nest, and Mark and Andrea agree that these
are their best years ever. Mark has become an avid
symphony fan, and Andrea has made an unending list
in her legal pad of things she appreciates about Mark.

He never tires of hearing them.

FOCUSED ATTENTION

I isnt enough to just be in the same room
with someone. A key ingredient in giving your
spouse quality time is giving them focused attention,
especially in this era of many distractions. When a
father is sitting on the floor, rolling a ball to his twoyear-old, his attention is not focused on the ball but on

his child. For that brief moment, however long it lasts,

they are together. If, however, the father is talking
on the phone while he rolls the ball, his attention
is diluted. Some husbands and wives think they are
spending time together when, in reality, they are only
living in close proximity. They are in the same house at
the same time, but they are not together. A wife who
is texting while her husband tries to talk to her is not
giving him quality time, because he does not have her
full attention.

Quality time does not mean that we have to spend
our together moments gazing into each other's eyes.
It means that we are doing something together and
that we are giving our full attention to the other
person. The activity in which we are both engaged
is incidental. The important thing emotionally is
that we are spending focused time with each other.
The activity is a vehicle that creates the sense of
togetherness. The important thing about the father
rolling the ball to the two-year-old is not the activity
itself but the emotions that are created between the
father and his child.

Similarly, a husband and wife going running

together, if it is genuine quality time, will focus not
on the run but on the fact that they are spending time
together. What happens on the emotional level is what
matters. Our spending time together in a common
pursuit communicates that we care about each other,
that we enjoy being with each other, that we like to do
things together.

QUALITY CONVERSATION

Like words of affirmation, the language of quality time
also has many dialects. One of the most common
dialects is that of quality conversation. By quality
conversation, I mean sympathetic dialogue where two
individuals are sharing their experiences, thoughts,
feelings, and desires in a friendly, uninterrupted
context. Most individuals who complain that their
spouse does not talk do not mean literally that he
or she never says a word. They mean that he or she
seldom takes part in sympathetic dialogue. If your

spouse's primary love language is quality time, such

dialogue is crucial to his or her emotional sense of
beingloved.

Quality conversation is quite different from the first
love language. Words of affirmation focus on what we
are saying, whereas quality conversation focuses on
what we are hearing. Iflam sharing my love for you by
means of quality time and we are going to spend that
time in conversation, it means I will focus on drawing
you out, listening sympathetically to what you have to
say. Iwillask questions, not in a badgering manner but
with a genuine desire to understand your thoughts,
feelings, and desires.

Imet Patrick when he was forty-three and had been
married for seventeen years. I remember him because
his first words were so dramatic. He sat in the leather
chair in my office and after briefly introducing himself,
he leaned forward and said with great emotion, “Dr.
Chapman, I have been a fool, a real fool”

“What has led you to that conclusion?” I asked.

“I've been married for seventeen years,” he said, “and
my wife has left me. Now I realize what a fool I've

been”

I repeated my original question, “In what way have
you been a fool?”

“My wife would come home from work and tell me
about the problems in her office. 1 would listen to
her and then tell her what I thought she should do. 1
always gave her advice. I told her she had to confront
the problem. 'Problems don't go away. You have to talk
with the people involved or your supervisor. You have
to deal with problems. The next day she would come
home from work and tell me about the same problems.
I would ask her if she did what I had suggested the day
before. She would shake her head and say no.

“After three or four nights of that, I would get angry.
I would tell her not to expect any sympathy from me
if she wasn't willing to take the advice I was giving
her. She didn't have to live under that kind of stress
and pressure. She could solve the problem if she would
simply do what I told her. It hurt me to see her living
under such stress because I knew she didn't have to.
The next time she'd bring up the problem, I would say,

“ don't want to hear about it. I've told you what you

need to do. If you're not going to listen to my advice, 1
don't want to hear it.”

“I would withdraw and go about my business. What
a fool I was, he said, “what a fool! Now I realize that
she didn't want advice when she told me about her
struggles at work. She wanted sympathy. She wanted
meto listen, to give her attention, to let her know that I
could understand the hurt, the stress, the pressure. She
wanted to know that I loved her and that I was with
her. She didn't want advice; she just wanted to know
that I understood. But I never tried to understand. I
was too busy giving advice. And now she's gone.”

Patrick's wife had been pleading for quality
conversation. Emotionally, she longed for him to
focus attention on her by listening to her pain and
frustration. Patrick was not focusing on listening but
on speaking. He listened only long enough to hear the
problem and formulate a solution. He didn't listen long
enough or well enough to hear her cry for support and
understanding.

Many of us are like Patrick. We are trained to analyze

problems and create solutions. We forget that marriage

is a relationship, not a project to be completed or a
problem to solve. A relationship calls for sympathetic
listening with a view to understanding the other
person's thoughts, feelings, and desires. We must be
willing to give advice but only when it is requested
and never in a condescending manner. Most of us
have little training in listening. We are far more
efficient in thinking and speaking. Learning to listen
may be as difficult as learning a foreign language,
but leam we must, if we want to communicate
love. That is especially true if your spouse's primary
love language is quality time and his or her dialect
is quality conversation. Fortunately, numerous books
and articles have been written on developing the art
of listening. 1 will not seek to repeat what is written
elsewhere but suggest the following summary of

practical tips.

1. Maintain eye contact when your spouse is talking.
That keeps your mind from wandering and

communicates that he/she has your full attention.

2. Don't listen to your spouse and do something else

at the same time. Remember, quality time is giving

someone your undivided attention. If you are doing
something you cannot turn from immediately, tell
your spouse the truth. A positive approach might
be, “I know you are trying to talkto me and 'm
interested, but I want to give you my full attention.
Ican't do that right now, but if you will give me ten
minutes to finish this, I'll sit down and listen to

you.” Most spouses will respect such a request.

3. Listen for feelings. Ask yourself, “What emotion
is my spouse experiencing?” When you think you
have the answer, confirm it. For example, “It sounds
to melike you are feeling disappointed because I
forgot -” That gives him the chance
to clarify his feelings. It also communicates that you

are listening intently to what he is saying.

4. Observe body language. Clenched fists, trembling
hands, tears, furrowed brows, and eye movements
may give you clues as to what the other is feeling.
Sometimes body language speaks one message
while words speak another. Ask for clarification to
make sure you know what she is really thinking and

feeling.

5. Refuse to interrupt. Research has indicated that
the average individual listens for only seventeen
seconds before interrupting and interjecting his
own ideas. IfI give you my undivided attention
while you are talking, 1 will refrain from
defending myself or hurling accusations at you
or dogmatically stating my position. My goal isto
discover your thoughts and feelings. My objective
is not to defend myself or to set you straight. Itis to

understand you.

LEARNING TO TALK

Quality conversation requires not only sympathetic
listening but also self-revelation. When a wife says, “
wish my husband would talk. I never know what he's
thinking or feeling,” she is pleading for intimacy. She
wants to feel close to her husband, but how can she
feel close to someone whom she doesn't know? In order
for her to feel loved, he must learn to reveal himself.
If her primary love language is quality time and her

dialect is quality conversation, her emotional love tank

will never be filled until he tells her his thoughts and
feelings.

Self-revelation does not come easy for some of us.
We may have grown up in homes where the expression
of thoughts and feelings was not encouraged but
squelched. To request a toy was to receive a lecture
on the sad state of family finances. The child went
away feeling guilty for having the desire, and he
quickly learned not to express his desires. When he
expressed anger, the parents responded with harsh
and condemning words. Thus, the child learned
that expressing angry feelings is not appropriate. If
the child was made to feel guilty for expressing
disappointment at not being able to go to the store
with his father, he learned to hold his disappointment
inside. By the time we reach adulthood, many of us
have learned to deny our feelings. We are no longer in
touch with our emotional selves.

A wife says to her husband, “How did you feel about
what Steve did?” And the husband responds, “I think
he was wrong. He should have— but he is not telling

her his feelings. He is voicing his thoughts. Perhaps he

has reason to feel angry or disappointed, but he has
lived so long in the world of thought that he does not
acknowledge his feelings. When he decides to learn
the language of quality conversation, it will be like
learning a foreign language. The place to begin is by
gettingin touch with his feelings, becoming aware that
he is an emotional creature in spite of the fact that he
has denied that part of his life.

If you need to learn the language of quality
conversation, begin by noting the emotions you feel
away from home. Carry a small notepad and keep it
with you daily. Three times each day, ask yourself,
“What emotions have I felt in the last three hours?
What did I feel on the way to work when the driver
behind me was riding my bumper? What did I feel
when I stopped at the gas station and the automatic
pump did not shut off and the side of the car was
covered in gas? What did I feel when I got to the office
and found that the project I was working on had to be
completed in three days when I thought I had another

two weeks?”

Write down your feelings in the notepad and a word
or two to help you remember the event corresponding

to the feeling. Your list may look like this:

Event Feelings
- tailgater - angry
- gas station - very upset

- work project due + frustrated and

anxious

Do that exercise three times a day and you will
develop an awareness of your emotional nature. Using
your notepad, communicate your emotions and the
events briefly with your spouse as many days as
possible. In a few weeks, you will become comfortable
expressing your emotions with him or her. And
eventually you will feel comfortable discussing your
emotions toward your spouse, the children, and events
that occur within the home. Remember, emotions
themselves are neither good nor bad. They are simply

our psychological responses to the events of life.

Based on our thoughts and emotions, we eventually
make decisions. When the tailgater was following you
on the highway and you felt angry, perhaps you had
these thoughts: I wish he would lay off; 1 wish he
would pass me; if I thought I wouldn't get caught, Pd
press the accelerator and leave him in the twilight;
I should slam on my brakes and let his insurance
company buy me a new car; maybe I'll pull off the road
and let him pass.

Eventually, you made some decision or the other
driver backed off, turned, or passed you, and you
arrived safely at work. In each of life's events, we have
emotions, thoughts, desires, and eventually actions.
The expression of that process is called self-revelation.
If you choose to learn the love dialect of quality

conversation, that is the learning road you must follow.

DEAD SEAS AND BABBLING BROOKS

Not all of us are out of touch with our emotions, but

when it comes to talking, all of us are affected by

our personality. I have observed two basic personality
types. The first I call the “Dead Sea” In the little
nation of Israel, the Sea of Galilee flows south by way
of the Jordan River into the Dead Sea. The Dead Sea
goes nowhere. It receives but it does not give. This
personality type receives many experiences, emotions,
and thoughts throughout the day. They have a large
reservoir where they store that information, and they
are perfectly happy not to talk. If you say to a Dead Sea
personality, “What's wrong? Why aren't you talking
tonight?” he will probably answer, “Nothing's wrong.
What makes you think something's wrong?” And that
response is perfectly honest. He is content not to talk.
He could drive from Chicago to Detroit and never say a
word and be perfectly happy.

On the other extreme is the “Babbling Brook.” For
this personality, whatever enters into the eye gate or
the ear gate comes out the mouth gate and there are
seldom sixty seconds between the two. Whatever they
see, whatever they hear, they tell. In fact, if no one
is at home to talk to, they will call someone else. “Do

you know what I saw? Do you know what I heard?” If

they can't get someone on the phone, they may talk to
themselves because they have no reservoir. Many times
a Dead Sea marries a Babbling Brook. That happens
because when they are dating, it is a very attractive
match.

If you are a Dead Sea and you date a Babbling Brook,
you will have a wonderful evening. You don't have to
think, “How will I get the conversation started tonight?
How will I keep the conversation flowing?” In fact, you
don't have to think at all. All you have to do is nod
your head and say, “Uh-huh, and she will fill up the
whole evening and you will go home saying, “What
a wonderful person” On the other hand, if you are
a Babbling Brook and you date a Dead Sea, you will
have an equally wonderful evening because Dead Seas
are the world's best listeners. You will babble for three
hours. He will listen intently to you, and you will go
home saying, “What a wonderful person” You attract
each other. But five years after marriage, the Babbling
Brook wakes up one morning and says, “We've been
married five years, and I don't know him. The Dead

Sea is saying, “I know her too well. 1 wish she would

stop the flow and give me a break” The good news
is that Dead Seas can learn to talk and Babbling
Brooks can learn to listen. We are influenced by our
personality but not controlled by it.

One way to learn new patterns is to establish a daily
sharing time in which each of you will talk about
three things that happened to you that day and how
you feel about them. I call that the “Minimum Daily
Requirement” for a healthy marriage. If you will start
with the daily minimum, in a few weeks or months
you may find quality conversation flowing more freely

between you.

QUALITY ACTIVITIES

In addition to the basic love language of quality time,
or giving your spouse your undivided attention, is
another dialect called quality activities. At a recent
marriage seminar, I asked couples to complete the
following sentence: “I feel most loved by my husband/
wife when .” Here is the response of a

twenty-nine-year-old husband who has been married

for eight years: “I feel most loved by my wife when
we do things together, things I like to do and things
she likes to do. We talk more. It sorta feels like we are
dating again.” That is a typical response of individuals
whose primary love language is quality time. The
emphasis is on being together, doing things together,
giving each other undivided attention.

Quality activities may include anything in which
one or both of you have an interest. The emphasis is
not on what you are doing but on why you are doing
it. The purpose is to experience something together, to
walk away from it feeling like, “He cares about me. He
was willing to do something with me that I enjoy, and
he did it with a positive attitude.” That is love, and for
some people it is love's loudest voice.

One of Emily's favorite pastimes is browsing in used
bookstores. “I love to just disappear into the stacks
and see what treasures I can find,” she says. Husband
Jeff, less of an avid reader, has learned to share these
experiences with Emily and even point out books
she may enjoy. Emily, for her part, has learned to

compromise and not force Jeff to spend hours in the

stacks. As a result, Jeff proudly says, “I vowed early on
that if there was a book Emily wanted, I would buy it
for her.” Jeff may never become a bookworm, but he has
become proficient at loving Emily.

Quality activities may include putting in a garden,
visiting historic sites, birding, going to a concert,
working out together, or having another couple over
for homemade soup and bread. The activities are
limited only by your interest and willingness to try
new experiences. The essential ingredients in a quality
activity are: (1) at least one of you wants to do it, (2) the
other is willing to do it, (3) both of you know why you
are doing it—to express love by being together.

One of the by-products of quality activities is that
they provide a memory bank from which to draw
in the years ahead. Fortunate is the couple who
remembers a foggy early-morning stroll along the
coast, the spring they put in a prairie garden, the
day they revisited their childhood neighborhood, the
night they attended their first major-league baseball
game together, the one and only time they went skiing
together and he broke his leg, the quiet times of

working side by side at night in their home office, and
oh yes, the awe of standing beneath the waterfall after
the two-mile hike. They can almost feel the mist as
they remember. Those are memories of love, especially
for the person whose primary love language is quality
time.

And where do we find time for such activities,
especially if both of us have vocations outside the
home? We make time, just as we make time for lunch
and dinner. Why? Because it is just as essential to our
marriage as meals are to our health. Is it difficult? Does
it take careful planning? Yes. Does it mean we have
to give up some individual activities? Perhaps. Does it
mean we do some things we don't particularly enjoy?
Certainly (see Jeff and Emily). Is it worth it? Without
a doubt. What's in it for me? The pleasure of living
with a spouse who feels loved and knowing that I have
learned to speak his or her love language fluently.

A personal word of thanks to Mark and Andrea in
Little Rock, who taught me the value of love language

number one, words of affirmation, and love language

number two, quality time. Now, it's on to Chicago and

love language number three.

YOUR TURN

What in your marriage detracts from spending quality
time?

IF YOUR SPOUSE'S LOVE LANGUAGES
QUALITY TIME:

1. Some couples are together a lot more than others.
Ifthat's the case for you, don't try to make all your
time together “quality time.” Designate specific

times and places for planned togetherness.

2. Ask your spouse for a list of five activities that he
would enjoy doing with you—don't assume you
know. Make plans to do one of them each month for
the next five months. If money is an issue, space the

freebies between the “we can't afford this” events.

3. One way to share quality time at a distance is to
include your spouse in your day as itis happening.
Send a photo of something you saw on your walk to
the office or relay a funny incident that happened
in a meeting. One woman said, “My husband sent a
photo of him, my daughter, and the dog sitting on
our front porch. I was at work and it made me feel

like I was hanging out with them”

4. Think of an activity your spouse enjoys, but which
brings little pleasure to you: SEC football, crafting,
nature photography. Tell your spouse that you are
trying to broaden your horizons and would like to
join them in this activity sometime this month. Set

a date and give it your best effort.

5. Plan a weekend getaway just for the two of you
sometime within the next six months. Be sureitis
a weekend when you won't have to be in touch with
the office or have a family commitment. Focus on
relaxing together doing what one or both of you
enjoy.

6. Make time every day to share with each other some
of the events of the day. When you spend more time
watching the news than you do listening to each
other, you end up more concerned about the Middle
East than about your spouse. Or: When you spend
more time on Facebook than you do listening to
each other, you end up more concerned about your

hundred “friends” than about your spouse.

7. You have to do chores anyway, so talk as you dust,
declutter, and do laundry. It will make the work go

much faster!

8. Read the travel section in the Sunday paper
together and dream out loud about places you'd like
to go. Whether you actually go to these places or

not, it's fun to imagine together.



LOVE LANGUAGE &3

Receiving Gifts

rik spent a year in Kelsey's “friend zone” before
she agreed to go out with him. Since they
were both big baseball fans, Erik took her to a
minor-league game in Indianapolis. They were sitting
in a grassy area beyond the left-field fence when
suddenly a hard-hit drive came their way. Erik jumped
up and made an impressive barehanded catch—his

first home-run grab ever.

Two days later Kelsey found a gift-wrapped package
outside her dorm room. She opened it and found
a baseball in a small plastic display case (the kind
collectors use). Taped to the inside of the case was a
ticket stub from the game. Inscribed on the ball was the

date of the game and these words:
Isthome-run catch
2nd best thing to happen to me that day

They were married two years after that first date.
Fifteen years later that baseball, still in its display case,
sits on Kelsey's dresser where she can see it every day.
Itis the first thing she would grab if the house were on
fire.

A REMINDER OF LOVE

When I studied anthropology, I was able to “visit”
people groups all over the world. 1 went to Central
America and studied the advanced cultures of the

Mayans and the Aztecs. I crossed the Pacific and

studied the tribal peoples of Melanesia and Polynesia.
I studied the Eskimos of the northern tundra and
the aboriginal Ainus of Japan. I examined the cultural
patterns surrounding love and marriage and found
that in every culture I studied, gift giving was a part of
the love-marriage process.

Anthropologists are intrigued by cultural patterns
that tend to pervade cultures, and so was I. Could it
be that gift giving is a fundamental expression of love
that transcends cultural barriers?

One of my anthropology field trips was to the island
of Dominica. Our purpose was to study the culture of
the Carib Indians, and on the trip I met Fred. Fred was
not a Carib but a young black man of twenty-eight
years. Fred had lost a hand in a fishing-by-dynamite
accident. Since the accident, he could not continue
his fishing career. He had plenty of available time,
and I welcomed his companionship. We spent hours
together talking about his culture.

Upon my first visit to Fred's house, he said to me,
“Mr. Gary, would you like to have some juice?” to

which I responded enthusiastically. He turned to his

younger brother and said, “Go get Mr. Gary some
juice.” His brother turned, walked down the dirt path,
climbed a coconut tree, and returned with a green
coconut. “Open it) Fred commanded. With three swift
movements of the machete, his brother uncorked the
coconut, leaving a triangular hole at the top. Fred
handed me the coconut and said, “Juice for you.” It was
green, but I drank it—all of it—because I knew it was
a gift of love. I was his friend, and to friends you give
juice.

At the end of our weeks together as I prepared to
leave that small island, Fred gave me a final token of his
love. It was a crooked stick fourteen inches in length
that he had taken from the ocean. It was silky smooth
from pounding upon the rocks. Fred said that the stick
had lived on the shores of Dominica for a long time,
and he wanted me to have it as a reminder of the
beautiful island. Even today when I look at that stick,
I can almost hear the sound of the Caribbean waves,
but it is not as much a reminder of Dominica as it is a

reminder of love.

A gift is something you can hold in your hand
and say, “Look, he was thinking of me, or, “She
remembered me.” You must be thinking of someone
to give him a gift. The gift itself is a symbol of that
thought. It doesn't matter whether it costs money.
What is important is that you thought of him. And
it is not the thought implanted only in the mind that
counts but the thought expressed in actually securing
the gift and giving it as the expression of love.

Mothers remember the days their children bring a
flower from the yard as a gift. They feel loved, even if
it was a dandelion or a flower they didn't want picked.
From early years, children are inclined to give gifts to
their parents, which may be another indication that
gift giving is fundamental to love.

Gifts are visual symbols of love. Most wedding
ceremonies include the giving and receiving of rings.
The person performing the ceremony says, “These
rings are outward and visible signs of an inward and
spiritual bond that unites your two hearts in love
that has no end.” That is not meaningless rhetoric.

It is verbalizing a significant truth—symbols have

emotional value. Perhaps that is even more graphically
displayed near the end of a disintegrating marriage
when the husband or wife stops wearing the wedding
ring. One husband said, “When she threw her wedding
rings at me and angrily walked out of the house,
slamming the door behind her, I knew our marriage
was in serious trouble. I didn't pickup her rings fortwo
days. When I finally did, I couldn't stop crying.” The
lonely rings stirred deep emotions within the husband.

Visual symbols of love are more important to some
people than to others. That's why individuals have
different attitudes toward wedding rings. Some never
take the ring off after the wedding. Others don't even
wear a wedding band. If receiving gifts is my primary
love language, I will place great value on the ring you
have given me and 1 will wear it with pride. 1 will
also be moved emotionally by other gifts that you give
through the years. 1 will see them as expressions of
love. Without gifts as visual symbols, I may question
your love.

Gifts come in all sizes, colors, and shapes. Some are

expensive, and others are free. To the individual whose

primary love language is receiving gifts, the cost of the
gift will matter little, unless it is out of line with what
you can afford. If a millionaire gives only one-dollar
gifts regularly, the spouse may question whether that
is an expression of love, but when family finances are
limited, a one-dollar gift may speak a million dollars
worth of love.

Gifts may be purchased, found, or made. The
husband who finds an interesting bird feather while
out jogging and brings it home to his wife has found
himself an expression of love, unless, of course, his
wife is allergic to feathers. For the man who can afford
it, you can purchase a beautiful card for less than five
dollars. For the man who cannot, you can make one for
free. Get the paper out of the trash can where you work,
fold it in the middle, take scissors and cut out a heart,
write “I love you,” and sign your name. Gifts need not
be expensive.

But what of the person who says, “I'm not a gift giver.
I didn't receive many gifts growing up. I never learned
how to select gifts. It doesn't come naturally for me.”

Congratulations, you have just made the first discovery

in becoming a great lover. You and your spouse speak
different love languages. Now that you have made
that discovery, get on with the business of learning
your second language. If your spouse's primary love
language is receiving gifts, you can become a proficient
gift giver. In fact, it is one of the easiest love languages
tolearn.

Where do you begin? Make a list of all the gifts
your spouse has expressed excitement about receiving
through the years. They may be gifts you have given
or gifts given by other family members or friends. The
list will give you an idea of the kind of gifts your
spouse would enjoy receiving. If you have little or no
knowledge about selecting the kinds of gifts on your
list, recruit the help of family members who know
your spouse. In the meantime, select gifts that you feel
comfortable purchasing, making, or finding, and give
them to your spouse. Don't wait for a special occasion.
If receiving gifts is his/her primary love language,
almost anything you give will be received as am
expression of love. (If she has been critical of your gifts

in the past and almost nothing you have given has been

acceptable, then receiving gifts is almost certainly not

her primary love language.)

THE BEST INVESTMENT

If you are to become an effective gift giver, you may
have to change your attitude about money. Each of
us has an individualized perception of the purposes of
money, and we have various emotions associated with
spending it. Some of us have a spending orientation.
We feel good about ourselves when we are spending
money. Others have a saving and investing perspective.
We feel good about ourselves when we are saving
money and investing it wisely.

If you are a spender, you will have little difficulty
purchasing gifts for your spouse; but if you are a
saver, you will experience emotional resistance to the
idea of spending money as an expression of love. You
don't purchase things for yourself. Why should you
purchase things for your spouse? But that attitude
fails to recognize that you are purchasing things for

yourself. By saving and investing money, you are

purchasing self-worth and emotional security. You are
caring for your own emotional needs in the way you
handle money. What you are not doing is meeting the
emotional needs of your spouse. If you discover that
your spouse's primary love language is receiving gifts,
then perhaps you will understand that purchasing
gifts for him or her is the best investment you can
make. You are investing in your relationship and filling
your spouse's emotional love tank, and with a full love
tank, he or she will likely reciprocate emotional love
to you in a language you will understand. When both
persons' emotional needs are met, your marriage will
take on a whole new dimension. Don't worry about
your savings. You will always be a saver, but to investin

loving your spouse is to invest in blue-chip stocks.

THE GIFT OF SELF

There is an intangible gift that sometimes speaks more
loudly than a gift that can be held in one's hand. I call
it the gift of self or the gift of presence. Being there

when your spouse needs you speaks loudly to the one

whose primary love language is receiving gifts. Sonia
once said to me, “My husband loves softball more than
he loves me.”

“Why do you say that?” I inquired.

“On the day our baby was born, he played softball. 1
was lying in the hospital all afternoon while he played
softball” she said.

“Was he there when the baby was born?”

“He stayed long enough for the baby to be born, but
ten minutes afterward, he left. It was awful. It was
such an important moment in our lives. I wanted us to
share it together. I wanted Tony to be there with me.”

That “baby” was now fifteen years old, and Sonia was
talking about the event with all the emotion as though
it had happened yesterday. I probed further. “Have you
based your conclusion that Tony loves softball more
than he loves you on this one experience?”

“No, she said. “On the day of my mother's funeral, he
also played softball”

“Did he go to the funeral?”

“Yes, he did. He went to the funeral, but as soon asit

was over, he left to get to his game. I couldn't believe it.

My brothers and sisters came to the house with me, but
my husband was playing softball”

Later, asked Tony about those two events. He knew
exactly what I was talking about. “I knew she would
bring that up,” he said. “I was there through all the
labor and when the baby was born. I took pictures; I
was so happy. I couldn't wait to tell the guys on the
team, but my bubble was burst when I got back to
the hospital that evening. She was furious with me.
I couldn't believe what she was saying. I thought she
would be proud of me for telling the team.

“And when her mother died? She probably didn't
tell you that I took off work a week before she died
and spent the whole week at the hospital and at her
mother's house doing repairs and helping out. After
she died and the funeral was over, I felt I had done allI
could do. Ineeded a breather. I like to play softball, and
I knew that would help me relax and relieve some of
the stress I'd been under. I thought she would want me
to take a break.

“I had done what I thought was important to her, but

it wasn't enough. She has never let me forget those two

days. She says that I love softball more than I love her.
That's ridiculous.”

He was a sincere husband who failed to understand
the tremendous power of presence. His being there for
his wife was more important than anything else in her
mind. Physical presence in the time of crisis is the most
powerful gift you can give if your spouse's primary
love language is receiving gifts. Your body becomes
the symbol of your love. Remove the symbol, and the
sense of love evaporates. In counseling, Tony and Sonia
worked through the hurts and misunderstandings of
the past. Eventually, Sonia was able to forgive him,
and Tony came to understand why his presence was so
important to her.

If the physical presence of your spouse is important
to you, I urge you to verbalize that to your spouse.
Don't expect him to read your mind. If, on the other
hand, your spouse says to you, “I really want you to be
there with me tonight, tomorrow, this afternoon,” take
his request seriously. From your perspective, it may
not be important; but if you are not responsive to that

request, you may be communicating a message you do

not intend. A husband once said, “When my mother
died, my wife's supervisor said that she could be off
two hours for the funeral, but she needed to be back in
the office for the afternoon. My wife told him that she
felt her husband needed her support that day and she
would have to be away the entire day. The supervisor
replied, If you are gone all day, you may well lose your
job.

“My wife said, 'My husband is more important than
my job. She spent the day with me. Somehow that day,
I felt more loved by her than ever before. I have never
forgotten what she did.

“Incidentally, she didn't lose her job. Her supervisor
soon left, and she was asked to take his job.” That wife
had spoken the love language of her husband, and he

never forgot it.

MIRACLE IN CHICAGO

Almost everything ever written on the subject of love
indicates that at the heart of love is the spirit of giving.

All five love languages challenge us to give to our

spouse, but for some, receiving gifts, visible symbols
of love, speaks the loudest. I heard the most graphic
illustration of that truth in Chicago, where I met Doug
and Kate.

They attended my marriage seminar and agreed
to take me to O'Hare Airport after the seminar on
Saturday afternoon. We had two or three hours before
my flight, and they asked if I would like to stop at a
restaurant. I was famished, so I readily assented.

Kate began talking almost immediately after we
sat down. She said, “Dr. Chapman, God used you to
perform a miracle in our marriage. Three years ago,
we attended your marriage seminar here in Chicago
for the first time. I was desperate,” she said. “I was
thinking seriously of leaving Doug and had told him
so. Our marriage had been empty for a long time. I
had given up. For years, I had complained to Doug that
I needed his love, but he never responded. I loved the
children, and I knew they loved me, but I felt nothing
coming from Doug. In fact, by that time, I hated him.
He was a methodical person. He did everything by

routine. He was as predictable as a clock, and no one

could break into his routine.

“For years,” she continued, “Itried to be a good wife.
I did all the things I thought a good wife should do. 1
had sex with him because I knew that was important
to him, but I felt no love coming from him. I felt like
he stopped dating me after we got married and simply
took me for granted. I felt used and unappreciated.

“When Italked to Doug about my feelings, he'd laugh
at me and say we had as good a marriage as anybody
else in the community. He didn't understand why I was
so unhappy. He would remind me that the bills were
paid, that we had a nice house and a new car, that I was
free to work or not work outside the home, and that I
should be happy instead of complaining all the time.
He didn't even try to understand my feelings. I felt
totally rejected.

“Well, anyway, she said as she moved her tea and
leaned forward, “we came to your seminar three years
ago. I did not know what to expect, and frankly
I didn't expect much. I didn't think anybody could
change Doug. During and after the seminar, he didn't
say too much. He seemed to like it. Then that Monday

afternoon, he came home from work and gave me a
rose. Where did you get that? Iasked. T bought it from
a street vendor, he said. I thought you deserved a rose.”
Istarted crying. 'Oh, Doug, that is so sweet of you.

“On Tuesday he texted me from the office at about
one thirty and asked me what I thought about his
picking up a pizza for dinner. That may not sound like a
big deal to most people, but Doug never does anything
like that. I told him I thought the idea was wonderful,
and so he brought home a pizza and we all had a fun
time together. I gave him a hug and told him how much
Ienjoyedit.

“When he came home on Wednesday, he brought
each of the kids a box of Cracker Jacks, and he had a
small potted plant for me. He said he knew the rose
would die, and he thought I might like something that
would be around for a while. I was beginning to think
I was hallucinating! I couldn't believe what Doug was
doing or why he was doingit.

“Thursday night after dinner, he handed me a card
with a message about his not always being able to
express his love to me but hoping that the card would

communicate how much he cared. Why don't we get
a babysitter on Saturday night and the two of us go
out for dinner?” he suggested. 'That would be great,
I said. On Friday afternoon, he stopped by the cookie
shop and bought each of us one of our favorite cookies.
Again, he kept it as a surprise, telling us only that he
had a treat for dessert.

“By Saturday night,” she said, “I was in orbit. Ihad no
idea what had come over Doug, or if it would last, but
I was enjoying every minute of it. After our dinner at
the restaurant, I said to him, 'Doug, you have to tell me
what's happening. I don't understand.”

She looked at me intently. “Dr. Chapman, this was a
man who never gave me a gift, ever. He never gave me
a card for any occasion. He always said, Tt's a waste
of money; you look at the card and throw it away:
He never bought the children anything and expected
me to buy only the essentials. He expected me to have
dinner ready every night. I mean, this was a radical

change in his behavior”

Iturned to Doug and asked, “What did you say to her
in the restaurant when she asked you what was going
on?”

“Itold her that I had listened to your lecture on love
languages at the seminar and that I realized that her
love language was gifts. I also realized that I had not
given her a gift in years, maybe not since we had been
married. I remembered that when we were dating, I
used to bring her flowers and other small gifts, but
after marriage I figured we couldn't afford that. I told
her that I had decided that I was going to try to get her
a gift every day for one week and see if it made any
difference in her. Ihad to admit that I had seen a pretty
big difference in her attitude during the week.

“I told her that I realized that what you said was
really true and that learning the right love language
was the key to helping another person feel loved. I said
I'was sorry that I had been so dense for all those years
and had failed to meet her need for love. Itoldher that I
really loved her and that I appreciated allthe things she
did for me and the kids. Itold her that with God's help,

Iwas going to be a gift giver for the rest of my life.

“She said, But, Doug, you can't go on buying me gifts
every day for the rest of your life. We can't afford that.
“Well, maybe not every day, I said, “but at least once a
week. That would be fifty-two more gifts per year than
what you have received in the past five years.”

“I don't think he has missed a single week in three
years,” Kate said. “He is like a new man. You wouldn't
believe how happy we have been. Our children call us
lovebirds now. My tank is full and overflowing”

Tlooked at Doug. “But what about you, Doug? Do you
feel loved by Kate?”

“Oh, I've always felt loved by her, Dr. Chapman. She
does so much to help me and the kids. She takes care
of the finances, knows where we all have to be when,
stays in touch with my family on Facebook ... I know
she loves me.” He smiled and said, “Now, you know
what my love language is, don't you?”

I did, and 1 also knew why Kate had used the word
miracle.

Gifts need not be expensive, nor must they be given

weekly. But for some individuals, their worth has

nothing to do with monetary value and everything to
do with love.

YOUR TURN

Reflect on ways to give gifts even if finances are tight.

IF YOUR SPOUSE'S LOVE LANGUAGES
RECEIVING GIFTS:

1. You've heard of the twelve days of Christmas. How
about twelve days of gifts for your spouse's birthday

or your wedding anniversary?

2. Let nature be your guide: The next time you take
a walk through the neighborhood, keep your eyes
open for a gift for your spouse. It may be a stone,
astick, or a feather. You may even attach special
meaning to your natural gift. For example, a smooth
stone may symbolize your marriage with many
ofthe rough places now polished. A feather may
symbolize how your spouse is the “wind beneath

your wings”

3. Discover the value of “handmade originals.” Make a
gift for your spouse. This may require you to enroll
in an art or crafts class: ceramics, scrapbooking,
painting, wood carving. Your main purpose for
enrolling is to make your spouse a gift. A handmade

gift often becomes a family heirloom.

4. When money is tight, think of appropriate
symbolic gifts. Look at pictures of beautiful houses
and daydream about what kind of house you would
have if money were no object. Instead of plane

tickets, go on a “flight of fancy” to Dubai or Sydney.

5. Keep a “Gift Idea Notebook.” Every time you
hear your spouse say: “I really like that,” or “Oh,
Iwould really like to have one of those!” write it
down in your notebook. (How many of us have
the experience of asking someone what they want
for their birthday or Christmas and getting the
response, “Oh, I don't know ... “) Listen carefully
and you will get quite a list. This will serve as a
guide when you get ready to select a gift. To prime
the pump, you may look through a favorite online

shopping site together.

6. Enlist a “personal shopper.” If you really don't have
aclue as to how to select a gift for your spouse, ask
a friend or family member who knows your wife or

husband well to help you. Most people enjoy making

a friend happy by getting them a gift, especially ifit
is with your money.

7. Offer the gift of presence during an especially hard
time in your spouse's life—perhaps if he's caring for
an elderly parent or she's dealing with a job crisis.

8. Give your spouse a book and agree to read it
yourself. Then offer to discuss together a chapter
each week. Don't choose a book that you want him
or her to read. Choose a book on a topic in which
you know your spouse has an interest: sex, football,
gourmet cuisine, investing, childrearing, religion,
history.

9. Give a lasting tribute. Give a gift to your spouse's
favorite charity in honor of her birthday, your
anniversary, or another occasion. Ask the charity to
send a card informing your spouse of what you have
done. The church or charity will be excited and so

will your spouse.

«o

OF
SEpp
4

LOVE LANGUAGE &4
Acts of Service

ichelle sat in the living room, pecking away
at the laptop. She could hear sounds from
the utility room, where husband Brad was
catching up with the piles of laundry. She smiled to
herself. In recent days Brad had cleaned the condo,
fixed supper, and run the errands, all because Michelle
was in the midst of working on her thesis for grad

school. It made her feel content ... loved.

Michelle's primary love language was what I call
“acts of service.” By acts of service, Imean doing things
you know your spouse would like you to do. You seek to
please her by serving her, to express your love for her
by doing things for her. So it was with Doug and Kate,
whom we met in the last chapter.

Such actions as cooking a meal, setting a table,
emptying the dishwasher, vacuuming, changing the
baby's diaper, picking up a prescription, keeping the
car in operating condition, paying the bills, trimming
the shrubs, walking the dog, and dealing with
landlords and insurance companies are all acts of
service. They require thought, planning, time, effort,
and energy. If done with a positive spirit, they are
indeed expressions of love.

And they don't necessarily require a lot of time.
One man always dreaded the chore of bringing in
the garbage cans from the curb at the end of a long
workweek. All he wanted to do was go directly in the
house, kick off his shoes, and relax. But some nights

were different: “As I turned down our street and

scanned the horizon for the toppled cans, they were
nowhere to be seen. My wife had already taken them
into the garage. The empty curb was a clear message
to me: 1 was thinking of you. You were with me, even

when you were gone.”2

CONVERSATION IN A MILL TOWN

I discovered the impact of acts of service in the
little village of China Grove, North Carolina. China
Grove sits in central North Carolina, originally nestled
in chinaberry trees, not far from Andy Griffith's
legendary Mayberry. At the time of this story, China
Grove was a textile town with a population of 1,500.
I had been away for more than ten years, studying
anthropology, psychology, and theology. 1 was making
my semiannual visit to keep in touch with my roots.
Almost everyone I knew except Dr. Shin and Dr.
Smith worked in the mill. Dr. Shin was the medical
doctor, and Dr. Smith was the dentist. And of course,
there was Preacher Blackburn, who was pastor of the

church. For most couples in China Grove, life centered

on work and church. The conversation at the mill
focused on the superintendent's latest decision and
how it affected their job in particular. The services
at church focused mainly on the anticipated joys of
heaven. In that pristine American setting, I discovered
love language number four.

I was standing under a chinaberry tree after church
on Sunday when a young couple approached me. I
didn't recognize either of them. I assumed they had
grown up while I was away. Introducing himself, Dave
said, “I hear you've been studying counseling.”

Ismiled and said, “Well, a little bit.”

“I have a question,” he said. “Can a couple make it in
marriage if they disagree on everything?”

It was one of those theoretical questions that Iknew
had a personal root. I went right to the point. “How
long have you been married?”

“Two years,” he responded. “And we don't agree on
anything”

“Give me some examples,” I said.

“Well, for one thing, Mary doesn't like me to go
hunting. I work all week in the mill, and I like to go

hunting on Saturdays—not every Saturday but when
hunting season is in.”

Mary had been silent until this point when she
interjected. “When hunting season is out, he goes
fishing, and besides that, he doesn't hunt just on
Saturdays. He takes off from work to go hunting”

“Once or twice a year I take off two or three days
from work to go hunting in the mountains with some
buddies,” Dave said, irritated. “What's wrong with
that?”

“What else do you disagree on?” Iasked.

“Well, she wants me to go to church all the time.
I don't mind going on Sunday morning, but Sunday
night I like to rest. It's all right if she wants to go, but I
don't think I ought to have to go.”

Again Mary spoke up. “You don't really want me to
go either,” she said. “You fuss every time I walk out the
door”

I knew that things weren't supposed to be getting
this hot under a shady tree in front of a church. As a
young, aspiring counselor, I feared that I was gettingin

over my head, but having been trained to ask questions

and listen, I continued. “What other things do you
disagree on?”

This time Mary answered. “He wants me to stay
home all day and work in the house,” she said. “He
gets mad if I go see my mother or go shopping or
something.”

“I don't mind her going to see her mother, he said,
“but when I come home, Ilike to see the house cleaned
up. Some weeks, she doesn't make the bed up for three
or four days, and half the time, she hasn't even started
supper. 1 work hard, and I like to eat when I get home.
Besides that, the house is a wreck, he continued. “The
baby's things are all over the floor, the baby is dirty,
and I don't like filth. She seems to be happy to live in
a pigpen. We don't have very much, and we live in a
small mill house, but at least it could be clean.”

“What's wrong with him helping me around the
house?” Mary asked. “He acts like a husband shouldn't
do anything around the house. All he wants to do is
work and hunt. He expects me to do everything.”

Thinking that I had better start looking for solutions

rather than prying for more disagreements, I looked at

Dave and asked, “Dave, when you were dating, before
you got married, did you go hunting or fishing every
Saturday?”

“Pretty much, but Ialways got home in time to go see
her on Saturday night. Most of the time, I'd get homein
time to wash my truck before I went to see her. I didn't
like to go see her with a dirty truck.”

As we continued talking, I learned that Mary had
gotten married right out of high school and that
during her senior year Dave came to see her almost
every night and stayed for supper. “He would help me
do my chores around the house and then we'd sit and
talk until suppertime”

“Dave, what did the two of you do after supper?” I
asked.

He looked up with a sheepish smile and said, “Well,
the regular dating stuff, you know”

“But if I had a school project,” Mary said, “he'd help
me with it. Sometimes we worked hours on school
projects. 1 was in charge of the Christmas float for
the senior class. He helped me for three weeks every

afternoon. He was great.”

I switched gears and focused on the third area of
their disagreement. “Dave, when you were dating, did
you go to church with Mary on Sunday nights?”

“Yes, I did, he said. “If I didn't go to church with her,
Icouldn't see her that night. Her father was strict that
way”

I thought I was beginning to see some light, but 1
wasn't sure they were seeing it. I asked Mary, “When
you were dating Dave, what convinced you that he
really loved you? What made him different from other
guys you had dated?”

“It was the way he helped me with everything,” she
said. “None of the other guys cared about all that. He
even helped me wash dishes when he had supper at our
house. He was the most incredible person I had ever
met, but after we got married that changed.”

Turning to Dave, I asked, “Why do you think you did
all these things for her before you were married?”

“It just seemed natural for me,” he said. “It's what 1
would want someone to do for me if she cared about

me.

“And why do you think you stopped helping her after
you got married?” I asked.

“Well, I guess I expected it to be like my family. Dad
worked, and Mom took care of things at the house.
I never saw my dad do anything around the house.
Since Mom stayed home, she did everything—cooking,
cleaning, washing, and ironing. Ijust thought that was
the way it was supposed to be.”

Now we were getting somewhere. “Dave, a moment
ago what did you hear Mary say when I asked her
what really made her feel loved by you when you were
dating?”

He responded, “Helping her with things and doing
things with her”

“So, can you understand how she could feel unloved
when you stopped helping her with things?” He was
nodding yes. I continued. “It was a normal thing for
you to follow the model of your mother and father in
marriage. Almost all of us tend to do that, but your
behavior toward Mary was a radical change from your
courtship. The one thing that had assured her of your

love disappeared.”

Then I asked Mary, “What did you hear Dave say
when I asked, Why did you do all of those things to
help Mary when you were dating?”

“He said that it came naturally to him,” she replied.

“That's right,” I said, “and he also said that is what he
would want someone to do for him if she loved him. He
was doing those things for you and with you because
in his mind that's the way anyone shows love. Once
you were married and living in your own house, he had
expectations of what you would do if you loved him.
You would keep the house clean, you would cook, and
so on. In brief, you would do things for him to express
your love. When he did not see you doing those things,
do you understand why he would feel unloved?” Mary
was nodding now too. I continued, “My guess is that
the reason you are both so unhappy in your marriage
is that neither of you is showing your love by doing
things for each other”

Mary said, “I think you're right, and the reason I
stopped doing things for him is because 1 didn't like
how he bossed me around. It was as if he was trying to

make me be like his mother.”

“That's it,” I said. “No one likes to be forced to do
anything. In fact, love is always freely given. Love
cannot be demanded. We can request things of each
other, but we must never demand anything. Requests
give direction to love, but demands stop the flow of
love”

Dave looked thoughtful. “I did boss her around—
demand, like you said. I guess I was disappointed in
her as a wife. 1 know I said some cruel things, and 1
understand how she could be upset with me.”

“I think things can be turned around rather easily
at this juncture,” I said. I pulled two note cards out of
my pocket. “Let's try something. I want each of you to
sit on the steps of the church and make a request list.
Dave, Iwant you to list three or four things that if Mary
chose to do them would make you feel loved when you
walk into the house in the afternoon. If making the bed
is important to you, then put it down. Mary, I want you
to make a list of three or four things that you would
really like to have Dave's help in doing, things which,
if he chose to do them, would help you know that he
loved you” (I'm big on lists; they force us to think

concretely.)

After five to six minutes, they handed me their lists.
Dave's list read:

* Make up the beds every day.

- Have the baby's face washed when I get home.

- Put her shoes in the closet before I get home.

« Try to have supper at least started before I get home

so that we could eat within 30 to 45 minutes after

get home.

I read the list out loud and said to Dave, “Tm
understanding you to say that if Mary chooses to do
these four things, you will view them as acts of love
toward you”

“Yeah he said, “just those four things. That would
really make a difference in how I feel about her”

Then Iread Mary's list:

- Iwish he would wash the car every week instead of

expecting me to do it.

- Iwish he would change the baby's diaper after
he gets home in the afternoon, especially iflam
working on supper.

« Iwish he would vacuum the house for me once a
week.

* Iwish he would mow the lawn every week in the
summer and not let it get so tall that I'm ashamed

ofouryard.

I said, “Mary, I am understanding you to say that if
Dave chooses to do those four things, you would take
his actions as genuine expressions of love toward you.”

“Iwould she said.

“Can you do what she asks, Dave?”

“Yes, he said.

“Mary, what about you? Can you do the things on
Dave's list?”

“Yes, I can. In the past, it always seemed like no
matter what I did, it was never enough.”

Iturned to Dave. “Dave, you understand that what I
am suggesting is a change from the model of marriage
that your mother and father had”

“Oh, my dad cut the grass and washed the car.”

“But he didn't change the diapers or vacuum, right?”

“Never!” he said, grinning.

“You don't have to do these, you understand? If you
do them, however, it will be an act of love to Mary”

And to Mary I said, “You understand that you don't
have to do these things, but if you want to express love
for Dave, here are four ways that will be meaningful
to him. I want to suggest that you try these for two
months and see if they help. At the end of two months,
you may want to add additional requests to your lists
and share them with each other. I would not add more
than one request per month, however”

“This really makes sense” Mary said. “Thank you”
Dave said. They took each other by the hand and
walked toward their car. I said to myself out loud, “
think this is what church is all about. Ithink Iam going
to enjoy being a counselor.” I have never forgotten the

insight I gained under that chinaberry tree.

WHAT I LEARNED FROM DAVE AND MARY

After years of research, I have realized what a unique
situation Dave and Mary presented me. Seldom do I
meet a couple who both have the same love language—
in this case, acts of service. But you may be wondering,
Then why were they having so much difficulty? The
answer lies in the fact that they were speaking
different dialects. They were doing things for each
other—but not the most important things. When Mary
and Dave were forced to think concretely, they easily
identified their specific dialects, and when they started
speaking them, their love tanks began to fill.

It's easy to work at the wrong things. A husband
could spend an entire long weekend doing chores—
raking leaves, preparing the lawn for winter, winding
up hoses and putting them away, winterizing the cars,
pulling holiday decorations out of the attic, cutting
logs for the fireplace—and not add a drop to his wife's
love tank. On the other hand, that same husband

could bring home Chinese takeout, clean the kitchen

afterward, and then put the kids to bed on his own
while his wife was wiped out after a long day —and fill
her love tankto overflowing.

Before we leave our mill town friends, 1 would like
to make three other observations. First, they illustrate
clearly that what we do for each other before marriage
is no indication of what we will do after marriage.
Before marriage, we are carried along by the force
of the in-love obsession. After marriage, we revert to
being the people we were before we “fell in love” Our
actions are influenced by the model of our parents;
our own personality; our perceptions of love; our
emotions, needs, and desires. Only one thing is certain
about our behavior: It will not be the same behavior we
exhibited when we were caught up in being “in love.”

That leads me to the second truth: Love is a choice
and cannot be coerced. Dave and Mary were criticizing
each other's behavior and getting nowhere. Once they
decided to make requests of each other rather than
demands, their marriage began to turn around.

Criticism and demands tend to drive wedges. With

enough criticism, you may get acquiescence from your

spouse. He may do what you want, but probably it will
not be an expression of love. You can give guidance to
love by making requests: “I wish you would wash the
car, change the baby's diaper, mow the grass,” but you
cannot create the will to love. Each of us must decide
daily to love or not to love our spouses. If we choose to
love, then expressing it in the way in which our spouse
requests will make our love most effective emotionally.

There is a third truth, which only the mature lover
will be able to hear. My spouse's criticisms about my
behavior provide me with the clearest clue to her
primary love language. People tend to criticize their
spouse most loudly in the area where they themselves
have the deepest emotional need. Their criticism is an
ineffective way of pleading for love. If we understand
that, it may help us process their criticism in a more
productive manner. A wife may say to her husband
after he gives her a criticism, “It sounds like that is
extremely important to you. Could you explain why
it is so crucial?” Criticism often needs clarification.
Initiating such a conversation may eventually turn the

criticism into a request rather than a demand. Mary's

constant condemnation of Dave's hunting was not an
expression of her hatred for the sport of hunting.
She blamed hunting as the thing that kept him from
washing the car, vacuuming the house, and mowing
the grass. When he learned to meet her need for love by
speaking her emotional love language, she became free

to support him in his hunting.

DOORMAT OR LOVER?

“I have served him for twenty years. I have waited on
him hand and foot. I have been his doormat while he
ignored me, mistreated me, and humiliated me in front
of my friends and family. I don't hate him. I wish him
no ill, but 1 resent him, and I no longer wish to live
with him” That wife has performed acts of service for
twenty years, but they have not been expressions of
love. They were done out of fear, guilt, and resentment.

A doormat is an inanimate object. You can wipe your
feet on it, step on it, kick it around, or whatever you
like. It has no will of its own. It can be your servant but

not your lover. When we treat our spouses as objects,

we preclude the possibility of love. Manipulation by
guilt (“If you were a good spouse, you would do this
for me”) is not the language of love. Coercion by fear
(“You will do this or you will be sorry”) is alien to
love. No person should ever be a doormat. We may
allow ourselves to be used, but we are in fact creatures
of emotion, thoughts, and desires. And we have the
ability to make decisions and take action. Allowing
oneself to be used or manipulated by another is not
an act of love. It is, in fact, an act of treason. You are
allowing him or her to develop inhumane habits. Love
says, “I love you too much to let you treat me this way.
Itis not good for you or me”

Learning the love language of acts of service will
require some of us to reexamine our stereotypes of
the roles of husbands and wives. These have changed
over the last several decades, but models from our
past can linger, and different cultures have different
expectations of the “right” way things are done in
marriage.

To Dave's credit, he was willing to break from his

expectations when he realized how important it was
to Mary. That is necessary for all of us if our spouse's
primary love language asks something of us that
seems inappropriate to our role.

A willingness to examine and change stereotypes
is necessary in order to express love more effectively.
Remember, there are no rewards for maintaining
stereotypes, but there are tremendous benefits to
meeting the emotional needs of your spouse. If your
spouse's love language is acts of service, then “actions
speak louder than words.”

Now let's move on to love language number five.

YOUR TURN

Many acts of service will involve household chores, but not.
all. What are some non-chore ways of serving your mate?

IF YOUR SPOUSE'S LOVE LANGUAGES
ACTS OF SERVICE:

1. Consider serving someone (or something) your
spouse loves: an older relative, caring attentively for

a pet, a favorite cause.
2. Print note cards with the following:

“Today I will show my love for you by ...” Complete
the sentence with a task you know your spouse
would love you to do: picking up the clutter, taking
old clothes to a thrift store, fixing something that's
been broken a long time, weeding the garden.

(Bonus points if it's a chore that's been put off.)

3. Ask your spouse to make a list of ten things he
or she would like for you to do during the next
month. Then ask your spouse to prioritize those
by numbering them 1-10, with 1 being the most
important and 10 being least important. Use this
listto plan your strategy for a month of love. (Get

ready to live with a happy spouse.)

4. While your spouse is away, get the children to
help you with some act of service for him. When
he walks in the door, join the children in shouting,
“Surprise! We love you!” Then share your act of

service.

5. This can also work when your spouse is away for a
long period oftime, such as a military deployment.
Recruit the kids to help you with some act of service
for him. Take a picture of the results and send it—
or, even better, show it to him via Skype and yell,

“Surprise! We love you!”

6. If your requests to your mate come across as
nags or putdowns, try writing them in words that
would be less offensive to them. Share this revised
wording with your spouse. For example, “The yard
always looks so nice, and I really appreciate your
work. I'd love to thank you in advance for mowing
the lawn this week before Paul and Amy come over

for dinner” Your husband might even respond,

“Where's the lawnmower, I can't wait!” Try it and

see.

7.If you have more money than time, hire someone
to do the acts of service that neither of you wants to
do, such as the yard work or a once-a-month deep

cleaning of your home.

8. Run interference for your spouse during his or her
favorite TV show or important sports event. Take
care of all the phone calls, kid emergencies, and so

on.

CAL 7
O

há

N

LOVE LANGUAGE &5
Physical Touch

e have long known that physical touch

is a way of communicating emotional

love. Numerous research projects in the
area of child development have made that conclusion:
Babies who are held, stroked, and kissed develop a
healthier emotional life than those who are left for
long periods of time without physical contact.

Physical touch is also a powerful vehicle for
communicating marital love. Holding hands, kissing,
embracing, and sexual intercourse are all ways of
communicating emotional love to one's spouse. For
some individuals, physical touch is their primary love
language. Without it, they feel unloved. With it, their
emotional tank is filled, and they feel secure in the love

of their spouse.

THE POWER OF TOUCH

Of the five senses, touching, unlike the other four,
is not limited to one localized area of the body.
Tiny tactile receptors are located throughout the body.
When those receptors are touched or pressed, nerves
carry impulses to the brain. The brain interprets these
impulses and we perceive that the thing that touched
us is warm or cold, hard or soft. It causes pain or
pleasure. We may also interpret it as loving or hostile.
Some parts of the body are more sensitive than
others. The difference is due to the fact that the tiny

tactile receptors are not scattered evenly over the body

but arranged in clusters. Thus, the tip of the tongue
is highly sensitive to touch whereas the back of the
shoulders is the least sensitive. The tips of the fingers
and the tip of the nose are other extremely sensitive
areas. Our purpose, however, is not to understand the
neurological basis of the sense of touch but rather its
psychological importance.

Physical touch can make or break a relationship. It
can communicate hate or love. To the person whose
primary love language is physical touch, the message
will be far louder than the words “I hate you” or “
love you.” A slap in the face is detrimentalto any child,
but it is devastating to a child whose primary love
language is touch. A tender hug communicates love to
any child, but it shouts love to the child whose primary
love language is physical touch. The same is true of
adults.

In marriage, the touch of love may take many forms.
Since touch receptors are located throughout the
body, lovingly touching your spouse almost anywhere
can be an expression of love. That does not mean

that all touches are created equal. Some will bring

more pleasure to your spouse than others. Your best
instructor is your spouse, of course. After all, she is the
one you are seeking to love. She knows best what she
perceives as a loving touch. Don't insist on touching
her in your way and in your time. Learn to speak
her love dialect. Your spouse may find some touches
uncomfortable or irritating. To insist on continuing
those touches is to communicate the opposite of love.
It is saying that you are not sensitive to her needs
and that you care little about her perceptions of what
is pleasant. Don't make the mistake of believing that
the touch that brings pleasure to you will also bring
pleasure to her.

Love touches may be explicit and demand your full
attention, such as in a back rub or sexual foreplay,
culminating in intercourse. On the other hand, love
touches may be implicit and require only a moment,
such as putting your hand on his shoulder as you
pour a cup of coffee or rubbing your body against
him as you pass in the kitchen. Explicit love touches
obviously take more time, not only in actual touching

but in developing your understanding of how to

communicate love to your spouse this way. If a back
massage communicates love loudly to your spouse,
then the time, money, and energy you spend in
learning to be a good masseur or masseuse will be well
invested. If sexual intercourse is your mate's primary
dialect, reading about and discussing the art of sexual
lovemaking will enhance your expression of love.

Implicit love touches require little time but much
thought, especially if physical touch is not your
primary love language and if you did not grow up
in a “touching family” Sitting close to each other as
you watch your favorite television program requires
no additional time but may communicate your love
loudly. Touching your spouse as you walk through
the room where he is sitting takes only a moment.
Touching each other when you leave the house and
again when you return may involve only a brief kiss or
hug but will speak volumes to your spouse.

Once you discover that physical touch is the primary
love language of your spouse, you are limited only by
your imagination on ways to express love. Coming up

with new ways and places to touch can be an exciting

challenge. If you have not been an “under-the-table
toucher” you might find that it will add a sparkto your
dining out. Ifyou are not accustomed to holding hands
in public, you may find that you can fill your spouse's
emotional love tank as you stroll through the parking
lot. If you don't normally kiss as soon as you get
into the car together, you may find that it will greatly
enhance your travels. Hugging your spouse before she
goes shopping may not only express love, it may bring
her home sooner. Try new touches in new places and
let your spouse give you feedback on whether he finds
it pleasurable or not. Remember, he has the final word.

You are learning to speak his language.

THE BODY IS FOR TOUCHING

Whatever there is of me resides in my body. To touch
my body is to touch me. To withdraw from my body
is to distance yourself from me emotionally. In our
society, shaking hands is a way of communicating
openness and social closeness to another individual.

When on rare occasions one man refuses to shake

hands with another, it communicates a message that
things are not right in their relationship. All societies
have some form of physical touching as a means of
social greeting. The average American male may not
feel comfortable with the European bear hug and kiss,
but in Europe that serves the same function as our
shaking hands.

There are appropriate and inappropriate ways to
touch members of the opposite sex in every society.
The recent attention to sexual harassment has
highlighted the inappropriate ways. Within marriage,
however, what is appropriate and inappropriate
touching is determined by the couple themselves,
within certain broad guidelines. Physical abuse is of
course deemed inappropriate by society, and social
organizations have been formed to help “the battered
wife and the battered husband.” Clearly our bodies are
for touching, but not for abuse.

This age is characterized as the age of sexual
openness and freedom. With that freedom, we have
demonstrated that the open marriage where both

spouses are free to have sexual intimacies with other

individuals is fanciful. Those who do not object
on moral grounds eventually object on emotional
grounds. Something about our need for intimacy and
love does not allow us to give our spouse such freedom.
The emotional pain is deep and intimacy evaporates
when we are aware that our spouse is involved with
someone else sexually. Counselors' files are filled with
records of husbands and wives who are trying to
grapple with the emotional trauma of an unfaithful
spouse. That trauma, however, is compounded for the
individual whose primary love language is physical
touch. That for which he longs so deeply—love
expressed by physical touch—is now being given to
another. His emotional love tank is not only empty; it
has been riddled by an explosion. It will take massive

repairs for those emotional needs to be met.

CRISIS AND PHYSICAL TOUCH

Almost instinctively in a time of crisis, we hug one
another. Why? Because physical touch is a powerful
communicator of love. In a time of crisis, more than

anything, we need to feel loved. We cannot always
change events, but we can survive if we feel loved.

All marriages will experience crises. The death of
parents is inevitable. Automobile accidents cripple
and kill thousands each year. Disease is no respecter
of persons. Disappointments are a part of life. The
most important thing you can do for your mate in a
time of crisis is to love him or her. If your spouse's
primary love language is physical touch, nothing is
more important than holding her as she cries. Your
words may mean little, but your physical touch will
communicate that you care. Crises provide a unique
opportunity for expressing love. Your tender touches
will be remembered long after the crisis has passed.

Your failure to touch may never be forgotten.

“MARRIAGE IS NOT SUPPOSED
TO BE THIS WAY”
Since my first visit to West Palm Beach, Florida, many

years ago, I have always welcomed invitations to lead

marriage seminars in that area. It was on one such

occasion that I met Joe and Maria. They were not
native to Florida (few are), but they had lived there
for ten years and called West Palm Beach home. They
had invited me to spend the night, and I knew from
experience that such a request usually meant a latenight counseling session.

As the evening proceeded, I thoroughly enjoyed Joe
and Maria's company. I found them to be a healthy,
happily married couple. For a counselor, that is an
oddity. 1 was eager to discover their secret, but being
extremely tired and knowing that they were going to
drive me to the airport the next day, I decided to do
my probing when I was feeling more alert and we had
forty-five minutes in the car together.

Maria and Joe began to tell me their story. In the
early years of their marriage, they had tremendous
difficulties. They had grown up in the same
community, attended the same church, and graduated
from the same high school. They liked the same music,
the same sports, the same movies. They seemed to
possess all the commonalities that are supposed to

assure fewer conflicts in marriage.

They began dating in their senior year in high
school. They attended separate colleges but saw each
other frequently, and were married three weeks after
he received his degree in business and she a degree
in nursing. Two months later, they moved to Florida,
where Joe had been offered a good job. The first
three months were exciting—moving, finding a new
apartment, enjoying life together.

They were about six months into the marriage when
Maria began to feel that Joe was withdrawing from her.
He was working longer hours, and when he was at
home, he spent considerable time with the computer.
When she finally expressed her feelings that he was
avoiding her, Joe told her that he was not avoiding her
but simply trying to stay on top of his job. He said that
she didn't understand the pressure he was under and
how important it was that he do well in his first year
onthejob. Maria wasn't pleased, but she decided to give
him space.

She began to develop friendships with other wives
who lived in the apartment complex. Often when

she knew Joe was going to work late, she would go

shopping with one of her friends instead of coming
straight home after work. Sometimes she was not at
home when Joe arrived. That annoyed him greatly, and
he accused her of being thoughtless and irresponsible.
Maria retorted, “Who's irresponsible? You don't even
call me and let me know when you'll be home. How can
Ibe here for you when I don't even know when you'll
be here? And when you are here, you spend all your
time working. You don't need a wife; all you need is a
computer!”

To which Joe shot back, “I do need a wife. Don't you
understand? That's the whole point. I do need a wife.”

But Maria did not understand. She was extremely
confused. In her search for answers, she went to
the public library and checked out several books on
marriage. “Marriage is not supposed to be this way,”
she reasoned. “I have to find an answer to our
situation.” When Joe went on his laptop, Maria would
pick up her book. In fact on many evenings, she read
until midnight. On his way to bed, Joe would notice
her and make sarcastic comments such as, “If you read

that much in college, you would have made straight

As.” Maria would respond, “I'm not in college. I'm in
marriage, and right now, I'd be satisfied with a C” Joe
went to bed without so much as a second glance.

Atthe end of the first year, Maria was desperate. She
had mentioned it before, but this time she calmly said
toJoe, “Iam going to find a marriage counselor. Do you
want to go with me?”

But Joe answered, “I don't need a marriage counselor.
I don't have time to go to a marriage counselor. I can't
afford a marriage counselor”

“Then I'll go alone,” said Maria.

“Fine, you're the one who needs counseling anyway.”

The conversation was over. Maria felt totally alone,
but the next week she made an appointment with a
marriage therapist. After three sessions, the counselor
called Joe and asked if he would be willing to come
in to talk about his perspective on their marriage. Joe
agreed, and the process of healing began. Six months
later, they left the counselor's office with a new
marriage.

I said to them, “What did you learn in counseling

that turned your marriage around?”

“In essence, Dr. Chapman,” Joe said, “we learned to
speak each other's love language. The counselor did
not use that term, but as you gave the lecture today,
it came to me. My mind raced back to our counseling
experience, and I realized that's exactly what happened
to us. We finally learned to speak each other's love
language”

“So what is your love language, Joe?” Iasked.

“Physical touch, he said without hesitation.

“Physical touch for sure,” said Maria.

“And yours, Maria?”

“Quality time, Dr. Chapman. That's what I was
crying for in those days while he was spending all his
time with his job and his computer.”

“How did you learn that physical touch was Joe's love
language?”

“It took awhile,” Maria said. “Little by little, it began
to come out in the counseling. At first, I don't think he
even realized it.”

“It's true,” Joe said. “I never told her that I wanted
to be touched, although I was crying inside for her to

reach out and touch me. In our dating relationship, I

had always taken the initiative in touching, but she
had always been responsive. I felt that she loved me,
but after we got married, there were times that I
reached out to her physically and ... nothing. Maybe
with her new job responsibilities, she was too tired. I
don't know, but Itook it personally. I felt that she didn't
find me attractive. Then I decided I wouldn't even try
because I didn't want to be rejected. So I waited to
see how long it would be before she'd initiate a kiss
or a touch or sexual intercourse. Once I waited for six
weeks before she touched me at all. I couldn't stand it.
My withdrawal was to stay away from the pain I felt
when I was with her.”

Then Maria said, “I had no idea that was what he was
feeling. I knew that he was not reaching out to me. We
weren't touching all the time like we did when we were
dating, but I just assumed that since we were married,
that was not as important to him now.

“I did go weeks without touching him. It didn't cross
my mind. I was working, taking care of things at home,
and trying to stay out of his way. I honestly didn't
know what else I could be doing. I didn't understand

why he wasn't paying attention to me. The thing is,
spending time with me is what made me feel loved and
appreciated. It really didn't matter whether we hugged
or kissed. As long as he gave me his attention, I felt
loved”

Once Joe and Maria discovered they were not
meeting each other's need for love, they began to turn
things around. “It was like I had a new husband,” she
said.

“What amazed me at the seminar today,” Joe added,
“was the way your lecture on love languages carried
me back all these years to that experience. You said in
twenty minutes what it took us six months to learn.”

“Well I said, “it's not how fast you learn it but how
well you learn it that matters. And obviously, you have
learned it well”

Joe is only one of many individuals for whom
physical touch is the primary love language.
Emotionally, they yearn for their spouse to reach
out and touch them physically. Running the hand
through the hair, giving a back rub, holding hands,

embracing, sexual intercourse—all of those and other

“love touches” are the emotional lifeline of the person

for whom physical touch is the primary love language.

YOUR TURN

Recall some nonsexual “touching times” that enhanced
intimacy between the two of you. What made these times
special?

1. Asyou walk from the car to go shopping, reach out

and hold your spouse's hand.

2. When you shop for your spouse, look for things
that will appeal to their tactile nature—a cashmere

sweater, a plush throw pillow, soft slippers.

3. Walk up to your spouse and say, “Have I told you
lately that I love you?” Take her in your arms and
hug her while you rub her back and continue.
“You're the best!” Untangle yourself and move on to
the next thing.

4. When you sit together in church, reach over and
hold your spouse's hand during times of prayer.

5. Initiate sex by giving your spouse a foot massage.
Continue to other parts of the body as long as it
brings pleasure to your spouse.

6. When family or friends are visiting, touch your

spouse in their presence. A hug, running your hand

along his or her arm, putting your arm around him
as you stand talking, or simply placing your hand on
her shoulder can earn double emotional points. It
says, “Even with all these people in our house, I still

see you”

7.Couples separated by circumstances such as
deployment use a variety of strategies to “touch”
when they cannot be physically together, says
author and former military wife Jocelyn Green. For
example, a handwritten letter feels more tangible
than an email. Some wives will wear an old shirt of
their husband's around the house—one wife said,
“Ifeel like he's hugging me when I wear his shirt.”
Sending a photo of yourself gives your spouse

something of you to touch.

Discovering Your Primar

Love Language

iscovering the primary love language of your

spouse is essential if you are to keep their

emotional love tank full. But first, let's make
sure you know your own love language. Having heard
the five emotional love languages,

WORDS OF AFFIRMATION

QUALITY TIME
RECEIVING GIFTS
ACTS OF SERVICE
PHYSICAL TOUCH,

some individuals will know instantaneously their own
primary love language and that of their spouse. For
others, it will not be that easy. Some are like Marcus,
who said to me, “I don't know. It seems that two of
those are just about equal for me.”

“Which two?” Iinquired.

“Physical touch and words of affirmation” he
responded.

“By “physical touch, what do you mean?”

“Well, mainly sex,” Marcus replied.

I probed a little further, asking, “Do you enjoy your
wife running her hands through your hair, or giving
you a back rub, or holding hands, or kissing and
hugging you at times when you are not having sexual

intercourse?”

“Sure” said Marcus. “I'm not going to turn them
down, but the main thing is sex. That's when I know
that she really loves me.”

Leaving the subject of physical touch for a moment,
Iturned to affirming words and asked, “When you say
that “words of affirmation' are also important, what
kinds of statements do you find most helpful?”

“Ilike it when she tells me Ilook good, that 'm smart
—almost anything if it's positive. When she tells me
she loves me!”

“Did you receive those kinds of comments from your
parents when you were growing up?”

“Not very often,” he said. “They yelled at me and told
me what to do. But Alicia was different.”

I asked Marcus to think about something. “Let me
ask you this. If Alicia were meeting your sexual needs,
that is, if you were having quality sexual intercourse
as often as you desire, but she was giving you negative
words, making critical remarks, sometimes putting
you down in front of others, do you think you would
feel loved by her?”

“No, not at all” he said. “T'd feel terrible.”

“Marcus,” I said, “Ithink we have just discovered that
your primary love language is words of affirmation.
Sexual intercourse is extremely important to you and
to your sense of intimacy with Alicia, but her words
of affirmation are more important to you emotionally.
If she were, in fact, verbally critical of you all the time
and put you down in front of other people, the time
may come when you would no longer desire to have
sexual intercourse with her because she would be a
source of deep pain to you.”

Marcus had made the mistake common to many
men: assuming that physical touch is their primary
love language because they desire sexual intercourse
so intensely. For the male, sexual desire is physically
based. That is, the desire for sexual intercourse is
stimulated by the buildup of sperm cells and seminal
fluid in the seminal vesicles. When the seminal
vesicles are full, there is a physical push for release.
Thus, the male's desire for sexual intercourse has a
physical root.

For the female, sexual desire is far more influenced

by her emotions. If she feels loved and admired and

appreciated by her husband, then she has a desire
to be physically intimate with him. But without
the emotional closeness, she may have little physical
desire. Her biological sexual drive is closely tied to her
emotional need for love.

Because the male is physically pushed to have
sexual release on a somewhat regular basis, he may
automatically assume that that is his primary love
language. But if he does not enjoy physical touch at
other times and in nonsexual ways, it may not be his
love language at all. Sexual desire is quite different
from his emotional need to feel loved. That doesn't
mean that sexual intercourse is unimportant to him
—it is extremely important—but sexual intercourse
alone will not meet his need to feel loved. His wife
must speak his primary emotional love language as
well.

When, in fact, his wife speaks his primary love
language and his emotional love tank is full, and he
speaks her primary love language and her emotional
tank is full, the sexual aspect of their relationship

will take care of itself. Most sexual problems in

marriage have little to do with physical technique but
everything to do with meeting emotional needs.

After further conversation and reflection, Marcus
said, “You know, I think you're right. Words of
affirmation is definitely my primary love language. If
she's critical and puts me down, I don't want to have
sex with her and I even think about other women. But
when she tells me how much she appreciates me and
admires me ... then it's a different story with us!”

Brittany has wondered for years whether she really
has only one primary love language. “I know I most
value quality time and acts of service,” she said. “But
it's hard to know which is primary with me. It used to
be acts of service, but it seems that as I've gotten older
I'm more concerned with sharing good times with
friends and family and less worried about how stuff
gets done”

How do you know?

HOW THE LOVE LANGUAGES CAN HURT US

What is your primary love language? What makes you

feel most loved by your spouse? What do you desire
above all else? Ifthe answer to those questions does not
leap to your mind immediately, perhaps it will help to
look at the negative use of love languages. What does
your spouse do or say—or fail to do or say—that hurts
you deeply?

Ignoring our partner's love languages is like ignoring
the needs of a garden: if we don't weed, water, or
fertilize, it will die a slow death. But if we actually
abuse our partner's love languages —that is, use them
for harmful purposes—it's like taking a machete to
that same garden and chopping everything up.

Each of the love languages is vulnerable to insincere
manipulation. The use of words your spouse loves
to hear just so they will engage sexually with you
is wrong. So is attempting to do a lot of chores for
someone just so they will praise you.

If your deepest pain is the critical, judgmental words
of your spouse, then perhaps your love language is
words of affirmation. Sarcastic, hateful, or dismissive
words are wounding to anyone, but especially so to

the person for whom affirming words is their love

language.

Similarly, the lack of words—giving someone the
“silent treatment”—can be devastating.

We have already discussed the hurt and anger felt
by spouses who resent their mates for “not helping
enough” around the house. Clearly these spouses' love
language is acts of service. But recently I heard about a
wife who took this a step further. She and her husband
had been arguing all weekend. On Sunday, rather
than make lunch for the two of them as usual, she
fixed something for herself and told him, “Make your
own lunch.” She withdrew a service she had always
performed for him—knowing his love language was
acts of service.

If your primary love language is gifts, you may
relate to the story of the young girl who had a very
hard Christmas one year. Her older brother had not
spent much time or effort on his gift giving. He gave
her something he had found lying around the house
—nothing she needed, nothing special or thoughtful.

She, of course, was deeply wounded.

But at least as destructive, as we saw with Sonia and
her softball-playing husband, Tony, is withholding the
gift of yourself-—your presence.

Similarly, the spouse whose love language is quality
time might find herself more bored by her and her
husband's evening routine of dinner, TV, and bed, or
struggle more when her spouse travels on business.
She might even long for more meaningful emails than
“Good meeting today —see you tomorrow.”

What of physical touch? Touch, of course, has
immense potential for abuse, as we have already
discussed. Touch can comfort, reassure, encourage,
invite; it can also scar physically and emotionally.

Touch withheld can also bring pain.

WHAT ARE YOU ASKING?

When you're trying to figure out your primary love
language, it helps to look back over your marriage
and ask, “What have I most often requested of
my spouse?” Whatever you have most requested is

probably in keeping with your primary love language.

Those requests have probably been interpreted by your
spouse as nagging—but in fact, they have been your
efforts to secure emotional love from your spouse.

Brittany, the woman who was wondering if she was
more quality time or acts of service, has thought about
this. “ guess by this measure I do lean more toward
service, if only because I feel like 'm always asking my
husband to do stuff!”

Another way to discover your primary love language
isto examine what you do or say to express love to your
spouse. Chances are what you are doing for her is what
you wish she would do for you. If you are constantly
doing acts of service for your spouse, perhaps
(although not always) that is your love language. If
words of affirmation speak love to you, chances are you
will use them in speaking love to your spouse. Thus,
you may discover your own language by asking, “How
do I consciously express my love to my spouse?”

But remember, that approach is only a possible clue
to your love language; it is not an absolute indicator.
For example, the husband who learned from his father

to express love to his wife by giving her nice gifts

expresses his love to his wife by doing what his father
did, yet receiving gifts is not his primary love language.
He is simply doing what he was trained to do by his
father.

I have suggested three ways to discover your own

primary love language:

1. What does your spouse do or failto do that hurts
you most deeply? The opposite of what hurts you

most is probably your love language.

2. What have you most often requested of your
spouse? The thing you have most often requested
is likely the thing that would make you feel most
loved.

3.In what way do you regularly express love to your
spouse? Your method of expressing love may be an

indication that that would also make you feel loved.

Using those three approaches will probably enable
you to determine your primary love language. If two
languages seem to be equal for you, that is, both speak
loudly to you, then perhaps you are bilingual. If so, you

make it easier on your spouse. Now he or she has two

choices, either of which will strongly communicate
love to you.

You may also wish to take the 5 Love Languages
Profile found at the back of the book. Discuss the
results with your spouse.

Two kinds of people may have difficulty discovering
their primary love language. The first is the individual
whose emotional love tank has been full for a long
time. Her spouse has expressed love in many ways,
and she is not certain which of those ways makes her
feel most loved. She simply knows that she is loved.
The second is the individual whose love tank has been
empty for so long that he doesn't remember what
makes him feel loved. In either case, go back to the
experience of falling in love and ask yourself, “What
did I like about my spouse in those days? What did he
do or say that made me desire to be with him?” If you
can conjure up those memories, it will give you some
idea of your primary love language. You could also ask
yourself, “What would be an ideal spouse to me? If I

could have the perfect mate, what would she be like?”

Your picture of a perfect mate should give you some
idea of your primary love language.

Having said all of that, let me suggest that you
spend some time writing down what you think is your
primary love language. Then list the other four in
order of importance. Also write down what you think
is the primary love language of your spouse. You may
also list the other four in order of importance if you
wish. Sit down with your spouse and discuss what you
guessed to be his/her primary love language. Then tell
each other what you consider to be your own primary
love language.

Once you have shared that information, I suggest
that you play the following game three times a week
for three weeks. The game is called “Tank Check and
it is played like this. When you come home, one of you
says to the other, “On a scale of zero to ten, how is your
love tank tonight?” Zero means empty, and 10 means
“I am full of love and can't handle any more.” You give
a reading on your emotional love tank —10, 9, 8, 7, 6,
5,4,3,2,1,or0, indicating how full it is. Your spouse
says, “What could I do to help fill it?”

Then you make a suggestion—something you would
like your spouse to do or say that evening. To the best
of his ability, he will respond to your request. Then
you repeat the process in the reverse order so that both
of you have the opportunity to do a reading on your
love tank and to make a suggestion toward filling it. If
you play the game for three weeks, you will be hooked
on it, and it can be a playful way of stimulating love
expressions in your marriage.

One husband said to me, “I don't like that love tank
game. I played it with my wife. I came home and said
to her, 'On a scale of zero to ten, how's your love tank
tonight? She said, 'About seven.' I asked, “What could I
doto help fill it?' She said, “The greatest thing you could
do for me tonight is to do the laundry. I said, Love and
laundry? I don't get it.”

I said, “That's the problem. Perhaps you don't
understand your wife's love language. What's your
primary love language?”

Without hesitation he said, “Physical touch, and

especially the sexual part of the marriage.”

“Listen to me carefully I said. “The love you feel
when your wife expresses love by physical touch is the
same love your wife feels when you do the laundry”

“Bring on the laundry!” he shouted. “I'll wash the
clothes every night if it makes her feel that good.”

Incidentally, if you have still not discovered your
primary love language, keep records on the tank check
game. When your spouse says, “What could I do to
help fill your tank?” your suggestions will likely cluster
around your primary love language. You may request
things from all five love languages, but you will
have more requests centering on your primary love
language.

Perhaps some of you are saying in your minds what
one couple said to me in Zion, Illinois. “Dr. Chapman,
all that sounds fine and wonderful, but what if the love
language of your spouse is something that just doesn't

come naturally for you?”

Tl discuss my answer in chapter 10.

YOUR TURN

Do you think by now you have a good sense of what your
spouse's love language is? How about them for you? What
more could you do to explore this?

If your love tank is completely empty or very full,
whether you know your love language or not, play the
Tank Check game over the next month. Ask for a reading
from O to 10 three evenings a week, and then take the
suggestions of your spouse to raise that number for him/
her. If your spouse is at a 10 consistently, you can pat
yourself on the back—but don't stop loving.

10

Love Is a Choice

ow can we speak each other's love language
when we are full of hurt, anger, and
resentment over past failures? The answer
to that question lies in the essential nature of our
humanity. We are creatures of choice. That means that
we have the capacity to make poor choices, which all
ofus have done. We have spoken critical words, and we
have done hurtful things. We are not proud of those
choices, although they may have seemed justified at

the moment. Poor choices in the past don't mean that
we must make them in the future. Instead we can say,
“Y'm sorry. I know I have hurt you, but I would like to
make the future different. I would like to love you in
your language. I would like to meet your needs.” I have
seen marriages rescued from the brink of divorce when
couples make the choice to love.

Love doesn't erase the past, but it makes the future
different. When we choose active expressions of love
in the primary love language of our spouse, we create
an emotional climate where we can deal with our past

conflicts and failures.

“IJUST DON'T LOVE HER ANYMORE”

Brent was in my office, stone-faced and seemingly
unfeeling. He had come not by his own initiative but
at my request. A week earlier his wife, Becky, had
been sitting in the same chair, crying. Between her
outbursts of tears, she managed to verbalize that Brent
had told her that he no longer loved her and that he

was leaving. She was devastated.

When she regained her composure, she said, “We
have both worked so hard the last two or three years.
I knew that we were not spending as much time
together as we used to, but I thought we were working
for a common goal. I cannot believe what he is saying.
He has always been such a kind and caring person. He
is such a good father to our children.” She continued,
“How could he do this to us?”

I listened as she described their twelve years of
marriage. It was a story I had heard many times
before. They had an exciting courtship, got married at
the height of the “in-love” experience, had the typical
adjustments in the early days of marriage, and pursued
the American dream. In due time, they came down
off the emotional high of the “in-love” experience
but did not learn to speak each other's love language
sufficiently. She had lived with a love tank only half full
for the last several years, but she had received enough
expressions of love to make her think that everything
was okay. However, his love tank was empty.

Itold Becky that I would see if Brent would talk with
me. I told Brent on the phone, “As you know, Becky

came to see me and told me about her struggle with
what is happening in the marriage. I want to help her,
but in order to do so, I need to know what you are
thinking”

He agreed readily, and now he sat in my office. His
outward appearance was in stark contrast to Becky's.
She had been weeping uncontrollably, but he was stoic.
I had the impression, however, that his weeping had
taken place weeks or perhaps months ago and that
it had been an inward weeping. The story Brent told
confirmed my hunch.

“I just don't love her anymore,” he said. “I haven't
loved her for a long time. I don't want to hurt her, but
we are not close. Our relationship has become empty. 1
don't enjoy being with her anymore. I don't know what
happened. I wish it were different, but I don't have any
feelings for her”

Brent was thinking and feeling what hundreds of
thousands of husbands have thought and felt through
the years. It's the “I don't love her anymore” mindset

that gives men the emotional freedom to seek love

with someone else. The same is true for wives who use
the same excuse.

I sympathized with Brent, for I have been there.
Thousands of husbands and wives have been there—
emotionally empty, wanting to do the right thing, not
wanting to hurt anyone, but being pushed by their
emotional needs to seek love outside the marriage.
Fortunately, I had discovered in the earlier years of
my own marriage the difference between the “inlove” experience and the “emotional need” to feel
loved. Most in our society have not yet learned that
difference.

The “in-love” experience that we discussed in
chapter 3 is on the level of instinct. It is not
premeditated; it simply happens in the normal context
of male-female relationships. It can be fostered or
quenched, but it does not arise by conscious choice. It
is short-lived (usually two years or less) and seems to
serve for humankind the same function as the mating
call ofthe Canada goose.

The “in-love” experience temporarily meets one's

emotional need for love. It gives us the feeling

that someone cares, that someone admires us and
appreciates us. Our emotions soar with the thought
that another person sees us as number one, that he or
she is willing to devote time and energies exclusively
to our relationship. For a brief period, however long it
lasts, our emotional need for love is met. Our tank is
full; we can conquer the world. Nothing is impossible.
For many individuals, it is the first time they have ever
lived with a full emotional tank, and it is euphoric.

In time, however, we come down from that natural
high back to the real world. If our spouse has learned
to speak our primary love language, our need for love
will continue to be satisfied. If, on the other hand, he
or she does not speak our love language, our tank will
slowly drain, and we will no longer feel loved. Meeting
that need in one's spouse is definitely a choice. Ifllearn
the emotional love language of my spouse and speak
it frequently, she will continue to feel loved. When
she comes down from the obsession of the “in-love”
experience, she will hardly even miss it because her
emotional love tank will continue to be filled. However,

ifI have not learned her primary love language or have

chosen not to speak it, when she descends from the
emotional high, she will have the natural yearnings
of unmet emotional needs. After some years of living
with an empty love tank, she will likely “fall in love”
with someone else, and the cycle will begin again.

Meeting my wife's need for love is a choice I make
each day. If I know her primary love language and
choose to speak it, her deepest emotional needs will be
met, and she will feel secure in my love. If she does
the same for me, my emotional needs are met and
both of us live with a full tank. In a state of emotional
contentment, both of us will give our creative energies
to many wholesome projects outside the marriage
while we continue to keep our marriage exciting and
growing.

With all of that in my mind, I looked back at
the deadpan face of Brent and wondered if I could
help him. I knew in my heart that he was probably
already involved with another “in-love” experience.
I wondered if it was in the beginning stages or
at its height. Few men who suffer from an empty

emotional love tank leave their marriage until they

have prospects of meeting that need somewhere else.

Brent was honest and revealed that he had been in
love with someone else for several months. He had
hoped that the feelings would go away and that he
could work things out with his wife. But things at
home had gotten worse, and his love for the other
woman had increased. He could not imagine living
without his new lover.

I sympathized with Brent in his dilemma. He
sincerely did not want to hurt his wife or his children,
but at the same time, he felt he deserved a life of
happiness. I told him the statistics: that the divorce
rate is higher in second marriages. He was surprised to
hear that but was certain that he would beat the odds.
Itold him about the research on the effects of divorce
on children, but he was convinced that he would
continue to be a good father to his children and that
they would get over the trauma of the divorce. I talked
to Brent about the issues in this book and explained
the difference between the experience of falling in
love and the deep emotional need to feel loved. I

explained the five love languages and challenged him

to give his marriage another chance. All the while,
I knew that my intellectual and reasoned approach
to marriage compared to the emotional high that he
was experiencing was like pitting a BB gun against an
automatic weapon. He expressed appreciation for my
concern and asked that I do everything possible to help
Becky. But he assured me that he saw no hope for the

marriage.

COMING DOWN OFF THE HIGH

One month later, I received a call from Brent. He
indicated that he would like to talk with me again.
This time when he entered my office, he was noticeably
disturbed. He was not the calm, cool man I had seen
before. His lover had begun to come down off the
emotional high, and she was observing things in Brent
that she did not like. She was withdrawing from the
relationship, and he was crushed. Tears came to his
eyes as he told me how much she meant to him and
how unbearable it was to experience her rejection.

Ilistened for an hour before Brent ever asked for my

advice. I told him how sympathetic I was to his pain
and indicated that what he was experiencing was the
natural emotional grief from a loss, and that the grief
would not go away overnight. I explained, however,
that the experience was inevitable. I reminded him of
the temporary nature of the “in-love” experience, that
sooner or later, we always come down from the high
to the real world. Some fall out of love before they get
married; others, after they get married. He agreed that
it was better now than later.

After a while, I suggested that perhaps the crisis
was a good time for him and his wife to get some
marriage counseling. I reminded him that true, longlasting emotional love is a choice and that emotional
love could be reborn in his marriage if he and his wife
learned to love each other in the right love languages.
He agreed to marriage counseling, and nine months
later, Brent and Becky left my office with a reborn
marriage. When I saw Brent three years later, he told
me what a wonderful marriage he had and thanked me
for helping him at a crucial time in his life. He told

me that the grief over losing the other lover had been

gone for more than two years. He smiled and said, “My
tank has never been so full, and Becky is the happiest
woman you are ever going to meet.”

Fortunately Brent was the benefactor of what I call
the disequilibrium of the “in-love” experience. That is,
almost never do two people fall in love on the same day,
and almost never do they fall out of love on the same
day. You don't have to be a social scientist to discover
that truth. Just listen to country music. Brent's lover
happened to have fallen out of love at an opportune

time.

THE POWER OF CHOOSING TO LOVE

In the nine months that I counseled Brent and Becky,
we worked through numerous conflicts that they had
never resolved before. But the key to the rebirth of their
marriage was discovering each other's primary love
language and choosing to speak it frequently.

Let me return to the question I raised in chapter 9.
“What if the love language of your spouse is something

that doesn't come naturally for you?” I am often asked

this question at my marriage seminars, and my answer
is always, “So?”

My wife's love language is acts of service. One of the
things I do for her regularly as an act of love is to
vacuum the floors. Do you think that vacuuming floors
comes naturally for me? My mother used to make
me vacuum. All through junior high and high school,
I couldn't go play ball on Saturday until I finished
vacuuming the entire house. In those days, I said to
myself, “When I get out of here, one thing I am not
going to do: I am not going to vacuum houses. T'll get
myself a wife to do that.”

But I vacuum our house now, and I vacuum it
regularly. There is only one reason I vacuum our house.
Love. You couldn't pay me enough to vacuum a house,
but I do it for love. You see, when an action doesn't
come naturally to you, it is a greater expression of love.
My wife knows that when I vacuum the house, it's
nothing but 100 percent pure, unadulterated love, and
Iget credit for the whole thing!

Someone says, “But, Dr. Chapman, that's different. 1

know that my spouse's love language is physical touch,

and I am not a toucher. I never saw my mother and
father hug each other. They never hugged me. Iamjust
not a toucher. What am I going to do?”

Do you have two hands? Can you put them together?
Now, imagine that you have your spouse in the middle
and pull him/her toward you. I'll bet that if you hug
your spouse three thousand times, it will begin to feel
more comfortable. But ultimately, comfort is not the
issue. We are talking about love, and love is something
you do for someone else, not something you do for
yourself. Most of us do many things each day that do
not come “naturally” for us. For some of us, that is
getting out of bed in the morning. We go against our
feelings and get out of bed. Why? Because we believe
there is something worthwhile to do that day. And
normally, before the day is over, we feel good about
having gotten up. Our actions preceded our emotions.

The same is true with love. We discover the primary

love language of our spouse, and we choose to speak it

whether or not it is natural for us. We are not claiming
to have warm, excited feelings. We are simply choosing
to do it for his or her benefit. We want to meet our
spouse's emotional needs, and we reach out to speak
his love language. In so doing, his emotional love tank
is filled and chances are he will reciprocate and speak
our language. When he does, our emotions return, and
our love tank begins to fill.

Love is a choice. And either partner can start the

process today.

YOUR TURN

A Rey thought here is the idea of speaking our mate's love
language whether or not it is natural for us. Why is this so
fundamentalto a healthy marriage?

Love Makes the Difference

ove is not our only emotional need.

Psychologists have observed that among our

basic needs are the need for security, selfworth, and significance. Love, however, interfaces
with all of those.

IfI feel loved by my spouse, I can relax, knowing that
my lover will do me no ill. I feel secure in her presence.
I may face many uncertainties in my vocation. I may
have enemies in other areas of my life, but with my

spouse I feel secure.

My sense of self-worth is fed by the fact that my
spouse loves me. After all, if she loves me, I must be
worth loving. My parents may have given me negative
or mixed messages about my worth, but my spouse
knows me as an adult and loves me. Her love builds my
self-esteem.

The need for significance is the emotional force
behind much of our behavior. Life is driven by the
desire for success. We want our lives to count for
something. We have our own idea of what it means
to be significant, and we work hard to reach our
goals. Feeling loved by a spouse enhances our sense
of significance. We reason, If someone loves me, I must
have significance.

I am significant because I stand at the apex of the
created order. I have the ability to think in abstract
terms, communicate my thoughts via words, and make
decisions. By means of printed or recorded words, Ican
benefit from the thoughts of those who have preceded
me. I can profit from others' experiences, though they

lived in a different age and culture. I experience the

death of family and friends and sense that there is
existence beyond the material. I discover that, in all
cultures, people believe in a spiritual world. My heart
tells me it is true even when my mind, trained in
scientific observation, raises critical questions.

I am significant. Life has meaning. There is a higher
purpose. 1 want to believe it, but I may not feel
significant until someone expresses love to me. When
my spouse lovingly invests time, energy, and effort in
me, I believe that I am significant. Without love, Imay
spend a lifetime in search of significance, self-worth,
and security. When I experience love, it influences all
of those needs positively. Iam now freed to develop my
potential. 1 am more secure in my self-worth and can
now turn my efforts outward instead of being obsessed
with my own needs. True love always liberates.

In the context of marriage, if we do not feel loved,
our differences are magnified. We come to view each
other as a threat to our happiness. We fight for
self-worth and significance, and marriage becomes a
battlefield rather than a haven.

Love is not the answer to everything, but it creates

a climate of security in which we can seek answers to
those things that bother us. In the security of love, a
couple can discuss differences without condemnation.
Conflicts can be resolved. Two people who are different
can learn to live together in harmony. We discover
how to bring out the best in each other. Those are the

rewards of love.

“WE'RE LIKE ROOMMATES”

When John and Susan arrived at my office, they had
been traveling for three hours. It was obvious John did
not want to be there. Susan had twisted his arm by
threats of leaving him. (1 do not suggest this approach,
but people do not always know my suggestions before
they come to see me.) They had been married for more
than thirty years and had never gone to counseling
before.

Susan began the conversation. “Dr. Chapman, I want
you to know two things up front. First of all, we don't
have any money problems. I was reading in a magazine

that money is the biggest problem in marriage. That's

not true for us. We both have worked through the
years, the house is paid for, the cars are paid for.
Second, 1 want you to know that we don't argue. I hear
my friends talking about the arguments they have all
the time. I can't remember the last time we ever had an
argument. Both of us agree that arguing is fruitless, so
we don't argue.”

As a counselor, I appreciated Susan's clearing the
path. I knew that she was going to get right to the
point.

She continued. “The problem is that I just don't feel
any love coming from my husband. Life is a routine
for us. We get up in the morning and go off to work.
In the afternoon, he does his thing and I do my thing.
We generally have dinner together, but we don't talk.
He watches TV while we eat. After dinner, he puttersin
the basement and then sleeps in front of the TV untilI
tell him it's time to go to bed. That's our schedule five
days a week. On Saturday, he plays golf in the morning,
works in the yard in the afternoon, and we go out to
dinner with another couple on Saturday night. He talks

to them, but when we get into the car to go home,

the conversation is over. On Sunday morning, we go to
church. And so on.

“We're like two roommates living in the same house.
There is nothing going on between us. I don't feel any

love coming from him. There's no warmth, there's no

emotion. It's empty; it's dead. I don't think I can go on
much longer like this.”

By that time, Susan was crying. I handed her a tissue
and looked at John. His first comment was, “I don't
understand her” After a brief pause, he continued. “
have done everything I know to show her that I love
her, especially the last two or three years since she's
been complaining about it so much. Nothing seems to
help. No matter what I do, she continues to complain
that she doesn't feel loved. I don't know what else to
do

Icould tell that John was frustrated and exasperated.
I inquired, “What have you been doing to show your
love for Susan?”

“Well, for one thing,” he said, “I get home from
work before she does, so I get dinner started every

night. In fact, if you want to know the truth, I have

dinner almost ready when she gets home four nights
a week. The other night, we go out to eat. I do all the
vacuuming because her back is bad. I do all the yard
work because she is allergic to pollen. I fold the clothes
when they come out of the dryer.”

He went on telling me other things that he did for
Susan. When he finished, 1 wondered, What does this
woman do?

John continued, “I do all those things to show her
that I love her, yet she sits there and says to you what
she has been saying to me for two or three years—that
she doesn't feel loved. I don't know what else to do for
her”

When I turned back to Susan, she said, “Dr.
Chapman, all of those things are fine, but I want him to
sit and talk to me. We don't ever talk. He's always doing
something. 1 want him to be with me, give me some
time, look at me, talk to me about us, about our lives.”

Susan was crying again. It was obvious to me that
her primary love language was quality time. She was
crying for attention. She wanted to be treated as a

person, not an object. John's busyness did not meet

her emotional needs. As I talked further with John,
I discovered that he didn't feel loved either, but he
wasn't talking about it. He reasoned, “If you have been
married for thirty-five years and your bills are paid and
you don't argue, what more can you hope for?” That's
where he was. But when I said to him, “What would be
an ideal wife to you? If you could have a perfect wife,
what would she be like?” he looked me in the eye for the
first time and asked, “Do you really want to know?”

“Yes,” I said.

He sat up on the couch and folded his arms across his
chest. A big smile broke on his face, and he said, “I've
dreamed about this. A perfect wife would be a wife who
would come home in the afternoon and fix dinner for
me. I would be working in the yard, and she would call
me in to eat. After dinner, she would wash the dishes. 1
would probably help her some, but she would take the
responsibility. She would sew the buttons on my shirt
when they fall off”

Susan could contain herself no longer. She turned to

him and said, “But you told me that you liked to cook.”

“I don't mind cooking” John responded, “but the
man asked me what would be ideal.”

I knew John's primary love language without
another word-—acts of service. In his mind, that was
the way you show love: by doing things for people.
The problem was that “doing things” was not Susan's
primary love language. It did not mean to her
emotionally what it would have meant to him if she
had been doing things for him.

When the truth dawned on John, the first thing he
said was, “Why didn't somebody tell me this years ago?
Icould have been sitting talking to her fifteen minutes
every night instead of doing all this stuff”

He turned to Susan and said, “For the first time in
my life, I finally understand what you mean when you
say “We don't talk I could never understand that. I
thought we did talk. I always ask, Did you sleep well?
Ithought we were talking, but now I understand. I'll
give you fifteen minutes every night for the rest of my
life—starting tonight. You can count on that.”

Susan looked at John. “I would love that. And, she

continued, “I don't mind fixing dinner for you. It will

have to be later than usual because I get off work later
than you, but I don't mind cooking. And I'll be happy
to sew your buttons on. You never left them off long
enough for me to get them. I'll wash dishes the rest of
my life if it will make you feel loved.”

Susan and John went home and started loving each
other in the right love languages. In less than two
months, they were on a second honeymoon. After a
trip to the Bahamas, they called to tell me what a
radical change had taken place in their marriage.

Can emotional love be reborn in a marriage? You bet.
The key is to learn the primary love language of your

spouse and choose to speak it.

YOUR TURN

What does your spouse do to make you feel more
“significant”? How about what you do for them?

Loving the Unlovel

t was a beautiful September Saturday. My wife
and I were strolling through Reynolda Gardens,
enjoying the flora, some of which had been
imported from around the world. The gardens had
originally been developed by R.J. Reynolds, the tobacco
magnate, as a part of his country estate. They are
now a part of the Wake Forest University campus.
We had just passed the rose garden when I noticed
Ann, a woman who had begun counseling two weeks

earlier, approaching us. She was looking down at
the cobblestone walkway and appeared to be in deep
thought. When I greeted her, she was startled but
looked up and smiled. I introduced her to Karolyn, and
we exchanged pleasantries. Then, without any leadin, she asked me one of the most profound questions
I have ever heard: “Dr. Chapman, is it possible to love
someone whom you hate?”

I knew the question was born of deep hurt and
deserved a thoughtful answer. I knew that I would be
seeing her the following week for another counseling
appointment, so I said, “Ann, that is one of the most
thought-provoking questions I have ever heard. Why
don't we discuss that next week?” She agreed, and
Karolyn and I continued our stroll. But Ann's question
did not go away. Later, as we drove home, Karolyn
and I discussed it. We reflected on the early days of
our own marriage and remembered that we had often
experienced feelings of hate. Our condemning words
to each other had brought us hurt and, on the heels of

hurt, anger. And anger held inside becomes hate.

What made the difference for us? We both knew it
was the choice to love. We had realized that if we
continued our pattern of demanding and condemning,
we would destroy our marriage. Fortunately over a
period of about a year, we had learned how to discuss
our differences without condemning each other, how
to make decisions without destroying our unity,
how to give constructive suggestions without being
demanding, and eventually how to speak each other's
primary love language. Our choice to love was made
in the midst of negative feelings toward each other.
When we started speaking each other's primary love
language, the feelings of anger and hate abated.

Our situation, however, was different from Ann's.
Karolyn and I had both been open to learning and
growing. I knew that Ann's husband was not. She had
told me the previous week that she had begged him
to go for counseling. She had pleaded for him to read
a book or listen to a speaker on marriage, but he had
refused all her efforts toward growth. According to her,
his attitude was: “I don't have any problems. You are

the one with the problems.” In his mind he was right;

she was wrong—it was as simple as that. Her feelings
of love for him had been killed through the years by his
constant criticism and condemnation. After ten years
of marriage, her emotional energy was depleted and
her self-esteem almost destroyed. Was there hope for
Ann's marriage? Could she love an unlovely husband?

Would he ever respond in love to her?

LOVE'S GREATEST CHALLENGE

I knew that Ann was a deeply religious person and
that she attended church regularly. 1 surmised that
perhaps her only hope for marital survival was in her
faith. The next day, with Ann in mind, I began to
read Luke's account of the life of Christ. I have always
admired Luke's writing because he was a physician
who gave attention to details and in the first century
wrote an orderly account of the teachings and lifestyle
of Jesus of Nazareth. In what many have called Jesus'
greatest sermon, I read the following words, which I

call love's greatest challenge.

But to you who are listening I say: Love your enemies,
do good to those who hate you, bless those who curse
ou, pray for those who mistreat you.... Do to others as
you would have them do to you. If you love those who
love you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners love
those who love them.3

It seemed to me that that profound challenge,
written almost two thousand years ago, might be the
direction that Ann was looking for, but could she do it?
Could anyone do it? Is it possible to love a spouse who
has become your enemy? Is it possible to love one who
has cursed you, mistreated you, and expressed feelings
of contempt and hate for you? And if she could, would
there be any payback? Would her husband ever change
and begin to express love and care for her? 1 was
astounded by this further word from Jesus” sermon:
“Give, and it will be given to you. A good measure,
pressed down, shaken together and running over, will
be poured into your lap. For with the measure you use,
it will be measured to you.”4

Could that principle of loving an unlovely person

possibly work in a marriage as far gone as Ann's?

I decided to do an experiment. 1 would take as my
hypothesis that if Ann could learn her husband's
primary love language and speak it for a period of time
so that his emotional need for love was met, eventually
he would reciprocate and begin to express love to her. I
wondered, Would it work?

Imet with Ann the next week and listened again as
she reviewed the hurts in her marriage. At the end of
her synopsis, she repeated the question she had asked
in Reynolda Gardens. This time she put it in the form
of a statement: “Dr. Chapman, Ijust don't know ifl can
ever love him again after all he has done to me”

“Have you talked about your situation with any of
your friends?” I asked.

“With two of my closest friends,” she said, “and a
little bit with some other people.”

“And what was their response?”

““Get out,” she said. “They all tell me to get out, that
he will never change, and that I am simply prolonging
the agony. But I just can't bring myself to do that.
Maybe I should, but I just can't believe that's the right
thingto do.”

“It seems to me that you are torn between your
religious and moral beliefs that tell you it is wrong
to get out of the marriage, and your emotional pain,
which tells you that getting out is the only way to
survive,” I said.

“That's exactly right, Dr. Chapman. That's exactly the
way I feel. Idon't know what to do.”

“I am deeply sympathetic with your struggle” 1
continued. “You are in a very difficult situation. I wish
Icould offer you an easy answer. Unfortunately, I can't.
Both of the alternatives you mentioned, getting out or
staying in, will likely bring you a great deal of pain.
Before you make that decision, I do have one idea. Iam
not sure it will work, but Id like you to try it. I know
from what you have told me that your religious faith
is important to you and that you have a great deal of
respect for the teachings of Jesus.”

She nodded. I continued, “I want to read something
that Jesus once said that I think has some application

to your marriage.” I read slowly and deliberately.

“But to you who are listening I say: Love your

enemies, do good to those who hate you, bless those

who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you.... Do
to others as you would have them do to you. If you love
those who love you, what credit is that to you? Even

sinners love those who love them.”

“Does that sound like your husband? Has he treated
you as an enemy rather than as a friend?”

She paused. “Yes,” she said quietly.

“Has he ever cursed you?” Iasked.

“Many times.”

“Has he ever mistreated you?”

“Often”

“And has he told you that he hates you?”

“Yes”

THE SIX-MONTH EXPERIMENT

“Ann, if you are willing, I would like to do an
experiment. 1 would like to see what would happen
if we apply this principle to your marriage. Let me
explain what I mean.” I went on to explain to Ann the
concept of the emotional tank and the fact that when

the tank is low, as hers was, we have no love feelings

toward our spouse but simply experience emptiness
and pain. Itold her that if we could learn to speak each
other's primary love language, that emotional need
could be met and positive feelings could grow again.

“Does that make sense to you?” Iinquired.

“Dr. Chapman, you have just described my life. Ihave
never seen it so clearly before. We were in love before
we got married, but not long after our marriage, we
came down off the high and we never learned to speak
each other's love language. My tank has been empty for
years, and I am sure his has also. Dr. Chapman, if l had
understood this concept earlier, maybe none of this
would have happened.”

“We can't go back, Ann,” I said. “All we can do is try to
make the future different. I would like to propose a sixmonth experiment.”

“Pl try anything” Ann said.

Iliked her positive spirit, but I wasn't sure whether
she understood how difficult the experiment would be.

“Let's begin by stating our objective,” I said. “If in six
months you could have your fondest wish, what would
itbe?”

Ann sat in silence for some time. Then thoughtfully
she said, “I would like to see us doing things together,
going places together. I would like to feel that he is
interested in my world. I'd like him to listen to me. Pd
like to feel that he values my ideas. I would like to see
us taking trips together and having fun again. I would
like to know that he values our marriage more than
anything”

Ann paused and then continued. “On my part, I
would like to have warm, positive feelings toward him
again. I would like to gain respect for him again. 1
would like to be proud of him. Right now, I don't have
those feelings.”

I was writing as Ann was speaking. When she
finished, I read aloud what she had said. “That sounds
like a pretty lofty objective,” I said, “but is that really
what you want, Ann?”

“More than anything.”

“Then let's agree” I said, “that this will be our
objective. In six months, we want to see you and Glenn

having this kind of love relationship.

“Now, let me suggest a hypothesis. Let's hypothesize
that if you could speak Glenn's primary love language
consistently for a six-month period, that somewhere
along the line his emotional need for love would begin
to be met; and as his emotional tank filled, he would
begin to reciprocate love to you.”

I continued, “You understand that this places all the
initiative in your hands. Glenn is not trying to work
on this marriage. You are. But if you can channel
your energies in the right direction, there is a good
possibility that Glenn will eventually reciprocate.” I
read the other portion of Jesus' sermon recorded by
Luke, the physician. “Give, and it will be given to you.
A good measure, pressed down, shaken together and
running over, will be poured into your lap. For with the
measure you use, it will be measured to you.”

“Generally speaking, if we are kind and loving
toward people, they will tend to be kind and loving
toward us. That does not mean that we can make a
person kind by being kind to him. We are independent
agents. Thus, we can spurn love and walk away from

love or even spit into the face of love. There is no

guarantee that Glenn will respond to your acts of love.
We can only say that there is a good possibility he will
do so.”

“IWANT TO BE A BETTER WIFE TO YOU”

We then discussed Ann and Glenn's primary love
languages. I guessed hers was quality time, and Ann
confirmed it. “In our early days we spent long hours
talking together, doing things together. I really felt
loved. More than anything, I wish that part of our
marriage could return. When we spend time together,
I feel like he really cares, but when he's always doing
other things, I feel like business and other pursuits are
more important than our relationship.”

“And what do you think Glenn's primary love
language is?” Iinquired.

“Ithink it is physical touch, and especially the sexual
part of the marriage. I know that when 1 felt more
loved by him and we were more sexually active, he
had a different attitude. I think that's his primary love

language”

“Does he ever complain about the way you talk to
him?”

“Well, he says Inag him all the time. He also says that
Idon't support him, that 'm always against his ideas.”

“Then let's assume,” I said, “that physical touch is
his primary love language and words of affirmation is
his secondary love language. The reason I suggest the
second is that if he complains about negative words,
apparently positive words would be meaningful to
him.

“Now what if you go home and say to Glenn, T've
been thinking about us and I've decided that 1 would
like to be a better wife to you. So if you have any
suggestions, I want you to know that I am open to
them. You can tell me now or you can think about it
and let me know what you think, but I would really
like to work on this. Whatever his response, negative
or positive, simply accept it as information. That initial
statement lets him know that something different is
about to happen in your relationship.

“Then based upon your guess that his primary love

language is physical touch and my suggestion that his

secondary love language may be words of affirmation,
focus your attention on those two areas for one month.

“If Glenn comes back with a suggestion as to how
you might be a better wife, accept that information
and work it into your plan. Look for positive things
in Glenn's life and give him verbal affirmation
about those things. In the meantime, stop all verbal
complaints. If you want to complain about something,
write it down in your personal notebook rather than
saying anything about it to Glenn this month.

“Begin taking more initiative in physical touch and
sexual involvement. Surprise him by being aggressive,
not simply responding to his advances. Set a goal to
have sexual intercourse at least once a week the first
two weeks and twice a week the following two weeks.”
Ann had told me that she and Glenn had had sexual
intercourse only once or twice in the past six months.
I figured this plan would get things off dead center
rather quickly.

“Oh, Dr. Chapman, this is going to be difficult” Ann
said. “ have found it hard to be sexually responsive to

him when he ignores me all the time. I have felt used

rather than loved in our sexual encounters. He acts as
though I am totally unimportant all the rest of the
time, and then he wants to jump in bed and use my
body”

“Your response has been natural and normal” 1
assured Ann. “Usually if a wife feels loved by her
husband, she will desire sexual intimacy. If she does
not, she will likely feel used in the sexual context.
That is why loving someone who is not loving you
is extremely difficult. It goes against our natural
tendencies. You will probably have to rely heavily upon
your faith in God in order to do this. Perhaps it will help
ifyou read again Jesus' sermon on loving your enemies,
loving those who hate you, loving those who use you.
And then ask God to help you practice the teachings of
Jesus.”

I could tell that Ann was following what I was
saying. Her head was nodding ever so slightly. Her eyes
told me she had lots of questions.

“But, Dr. Chapman, isn't it being hypocritical to
express love sexually when you have such negative

feelings toward the person?”

“Perhaps it would be helpful for us to distinguish
between love as a feeling and love as an action,” I said.
“If you claim to have feelings that you do not have,
that is hypocritical and such false communication is
not the way to build intimate relationships. But if you
express an act of love that is designed for the other
person's benefit or pleasure, it is simply a choice. You
are not claiming that the action grows out of a deep
emotional bonding. You are simply choosing to do
something for his benefit. I think that must be what
Jesus meant.

“Certainly we do not have warm feelings for people
who hate us. That would be abnormal, but we can do
loving acts for them. That is simply a choice. We hope
that such loving acts will have a positive effect upon
their attitudes and behavior and treatment, but at least
we have chosen to do something positive for them.”

My answer seemed to satisfy Ann, at least for the
moment. I had the feeling that we would discuss that
again. Ialso had the feeling that if the experiment was
going to get off the ground, it would be because of
Ann's deep faith in God.

“After the first month, I said, “I want you to ask
Glenn for feedback on how you are doing. Using your
own words, ask him, “Glenn, you remember a few
weeks ago when I told you I was going to try to be a
better wife? 1 want to ask how you think I am doing.

“Whatever Glenn says, accept it as information.
Whatever his response, do not argue but accept it and
assure him that you are serious about being a better
wife, and if he has additional suggestions, you are open
to them.

“Follow this pattern of asking for feedback once
a month for the entire six months. Whenever
Glenn gives you the first positive response, you will
know that your efforts are getting through to him
emotionally. One week after you receive the first
positive feedback, I want you to make a request
of Glenn—something that you would like him to
do, something in keeping with your primary love
language. For example, you may say to him one
evening, “Glenn, do you know something I would like
to do? Do you remember how we used to go take walks

in Reynolda Gardens together? I'd like to go do that

with you on Thursday night. The kids are going to
be staying at my mom's. Do you think that would be
possible?

“Make the request something specific, not general.
Don't say, “You know, I wish we would spend more time
together. That's too vague. How will you know when
he's done it? But if you make your request specific, he
will know exactly what you want and you will know
that, when he does it, he is choosing to do something
for your benefit.

“Do this each month. If he does it, fine; if he doesn't
do it, fine. But when he does it, you will know that
he is responding to your needs. In the process, you
are teaching him your primary love language because
the requests you make are in keeping with your love
language. If he chooses to begin loving you in your
primary language, your positive emotions toward him
will begin to resurface. Your emotional tank will begin
to fill up and in time the marriage will, in fact, be
reborn.”

“Dr. Chapman, I would do anything if that could
happeny Ann said.

“Well” I responded, “it will take a lot of hard
work, but I believe it's worth a try. I'm personally
interested to see if this experiment works and if our
hypothesis is true. 1 would like to meet with you
regularly throughout this process —perhaps every two
weeks—and I would like you to keep records on the
positive words of affirmation that you give Glenn each
week. Also, 1 would like you to bring me your list of
complaints that you have written in your notebook
without stating them to Glenn. Perhaps from the felt
complaints, I can help you build specific requests for
Glenn that will help meet some of those frustrations.
Eventually, 1 want you to learn how to share your
frustrations and irritations in a constructive way, and
I want you and Glenn to learn how to work through
those irritations and conflicts. But during this sixmonth experiment, I want you to write them down
without telling Glenn.”

Ann left, and I believed that she had the answer to
her question: “Is it possible to love someone whom you
hate?”

In the next six months, Ann saw a tremendous

change in Glenn's attitude and treatment of her. The
first month, he treated the whole thing lightly. But
after the second month, he gave her positive feedback
about her efforts. In the last four months, he responded
positively to almost all of her requests, and her feelings
for him began to change drastically. Glenn never came
for counseling, but he did listen to some of my CDs
and discussed them with Ann. He encouraged Ann to
continue her counseling, which she did for another
three months after our experiment. To this day, Glenn
swears to his friends that Iam a miracle worker. know
in fact that love is a miracle worker.

Perhaps you need a miracle in your own marriage.
Why not try Ann's experiment? Tell your spouse that
you have been thinking about your marriage and have
decided that you would like to do a better job of
meeting his/her needs. Ask for suggestions on how
you could improve. His suggestions will be a clue to
his primary love language. If he makes no suggestions,
guess his love language based on the things he has
complained about over the years. Then, for six months,

focus your attention on that love language. At the end

of each month, ask your spouse for feedback on how
you are doing and for further suggestions.

Whenever your spouse indicates that he is seeing
improvement, wait one week and then make a specific
request. The request should be something you really
want him to do for you. If he chooses to do it, you will
know that he is responding to your needs. If he does

not honor your request, continue to love him. Maybe

next month he will respond positively. If your spouse
starts speaking your love language by responding to
your requests, your positive emotions toward him will
return, and in time your marriage will be reborn.
I cannot guarantee the results, but scores of people
whom 1 have counseled have experienced the miracle

oflove.

If your marriage is in the serious trouble discussed
inthis chapter, you need to begin by making a strong
commitment of the will to undertake the following
experiment. You risk further pain and rejection,

but you also stand to regain a healthy and fulfilling

marriage. Count the cost; it's worth the attempt.

1. Ask how you can be a better spouse, and regardless
ofthe other's attitude, act on what he or she tells
you. Continue to both seek more input and comply
with those wishes with all your heart and will.

Assure your spouse that your motives are pure.

2. When you receive positive feedback, you
know there is progress. Each month make one
nonthreatening but specific request that is easy for
your spouse. Make sure it relates to your primary
love language and will help replenish your empty
tank.

3. When your spouse responds and meets your need,
you will be able to react with not only your will

but your emotions as well. Without overreacting,

continue positive feedback and affirmation of your

spouse at these times.

4. As your marriage begins to truly heal and grow
deeper, make sure you don't “rest on your laurels”
and forget your spouse's love language and daily
needs. You're on the road to your dreams, so stay
there! Put appointments into your schedule to

assess together how you're doing.

A Personal Word

ell, what do you think? Having read

these pages, walked in and out of the

lives of several couples, visited small
villages and large cities, sat with me in the counseling
office, and talked with people in restaurants, what
do you think? Could these concepts radically alter
the emotional climate of your marriage? What would
happen if you discovered the primary love language of
your spouse and chose to speak it consistently?

Neither you nor I can answer that question until
you have tried it. I know that many couples who have
heard this concept at my marriage seminars say that
choosing to love and expressing it in the primary love
language of their spouse has made a drastic difference
in their marriage. When the emotional need for love
is met, it creates a climate where the couple can deal
with the rest of life in a much more productive manner.
Consider Mark and Robin. Robin figured out that Mark's
primary love language was affirming words, usually
involving something specific (“I like how you're
protective of me; it makes me feel loved”). “It greatly
helps me understand him,” she said. “Now, that's not
to imply that I always say the right thing! But simply
knowing how he's wired has drawn us closer.” Robin
says her love language is acts of service. “Mark would
compliment me about something, because that's his
love language, and somehow it never made me feel all
that great. But when we figured out that what I really
valued were acts of service, even something small like
bringing me coffee in bed in the morning, our marriage

tooka giant step.”

We each come to marriage with a different
personality and history. We bring emotional baggage
into our marriage relationship. We come with different
expectations, different ways of approaching things,
and different opinions about what matters in life. In
a healthy marriage, that variety of perspectives must
be processed. We need not agree on everything, but
we must find a way to handle our differences so
that they do not become divisive. With empty love
tanks, couples tend to argue and withdraw, and some
may tend to be violent verbally or physically in their
arguments. But when the love tank is full, we create
a climate of friendliness, a climate that seeks to
understand, that is willing to allow differences and to
negotiate problems. I am convinced that no single area
of marriage affects the rest of marriage as much as
meeting the emotional need for love.

The ability to love, especially when your spouse
is not loving you, may seem impossible for some.
Such love may require us to draw upon our spiritual
resources. A number of years ago, as I faced my own

marital struggles, I rediscovered my need for God.

As an anthropologist, I had been trained to examine
data. I decided to personally excavate the roots of
the Christian faith. Examining the historical accounts
of Christ's birth, life, death, and resurrection, I came
to view His death as an expression of love and His
resurrection as profound evidence of His power. I
became a true “believer” I committed my life to Him
and have found that He provides the inner spiritual
energy to love, even when love is not reciprocated. I
would encourage you to make your own investigation
of the One who, as He died, prayed for those who killed
Him: “Father, forgive them for they know not what
they do.” That is love's ultimate expression.

The high divorce rate in our country bears witness
that thousands of married couples have been living
with an empty emotional love tank. I believe that the
concepts in this book could make a significant impact
upon the marriages and families of our country.

I have not written this book as an academic treatise
to be stored in the libraries of colleges and universities,
although I hope that professors of sociology and
psychology will find it helpful in courses on marriage

and family life. I have written not to those who are
studying marriage but to those who are married, to
those who have experienced the “in-love” euphoria,
who entered marriage with lofty dreams of making
each other supremely happy but in the reality of dayto-day life are in danger of losing that dream entirely.
Itis my hope that thousands of those couples will not
only rediscover their dream but will see the path to
making their dreams come true.

I dream of a day when the potential of the married
couples in this country can be unleashed for the
good of humankind, when husbands and wives can
live life with full emotional love tanks and reach out
to accomplish their potential as individuals and as
couples. I dream of a day when children can grow up
in homes filled with love and security, where children's
developing energies can be channeled to learning and
serving rather than seeking the love they did not
receive at home. It is my desire that this brief volume

will kindle the flame of love in your marriage and in

the marriages of thousands of other couples like you.

I wrote this for you. I hope it changes your life. And
ifit does, be sure to give it to someone else. 1 would be
pleased if you would give a copy of this book to your
family, to your brothers and sisters, to your married
children, to your employees, to those in your civic club
or church or synagogue. Who knows? Together we may

see our dream come true.

For a free online study guide, please visit:

Slovelanguages.com

This group discussion guide is designed to both help
couples apply the concepts from The 5 Love Languages

and stimulate genuine dialogue among study groups.

Frequently Asked Questions

1. WhatifI can't discover my primary love language?
“I've taken The 5 Love Languages Profile and my
scores come out almost even except for Receiving Gifts.
I know that's not my primary love language. What
should I do?”

In the book, I discuss three approaches to
discovering your love language.

« First, observe how you most often express love to

others. If you're regularly doing Acts of Service
for others, this may be your love language. If
you're consistently verbally affirming people,
then Words of Affirmation is likely your love

language.

* Second, consider what you complain about

most often. When you say to your wife, “ don't
think you'd ever touch meifI didn't initiate

it you're revealing that Physical Touch is your
primary love language. When your wife goes
ona shopping trip in the city and you say, “You
didn't bring me anything?” you're indicating
that Receiving Gifts is your love language. The
statement “We don't ever spend time together”
indicates the love language of Quality Time. Your
complaints reveal your inner desires. (If you
have difficulty remembering what you complain

about most often, ask your wife. She'll know.)

+ Third, think of the requests you make of your

wife most often. If you're saying, “Will you give

me a back rub?” you are asking for Physical

Touch. “Do you think we could get a weekend
away this month?” is a request for Quality Time.
“Would it be possible for you to clean out your
closet this afternoon?” expresses your desire for

Acts of Service.

One husband told me that he discovered his
love language by simply following the process of
elimination. He knew that Receiving Gifts was not
his language, so that left only four. He asked himself,
“If I had to give up one of the four, which one would
Igive up first?” His answer was Quality Time. “Ofthe
three remaining, if I had to give up another, which
one would I give up?” He concluded that apart from
sexual intercourse, he could give up Physical Touch.
He could get along without the pats and hugs and
holding hands. That left Acts of Service and Words
of Affirmation. While he appreciated the things his
wife did for him, he knew that her affirming words
were really what gave him life. He could live for a
whole day on one positive comment from her. That's
how much they meant to him. It was no stretch to

conclude that Words of Affirmation was his primary

love language and Acts of Service was his secondary

love language.

2. WhatifI can't discover my wife's love language?
“My wife hasn't read the book, but we have discussed
the love languages. She says she doesn't know what her

love language is.”

My first suggestion is to give your wife a copy of
The 5 Love Languages: The Secret to Love That Lasts.
If she reads it, she'll likely be eager to share her love
language with you. However, if she doesn't have the
time or interest to read the book, I would suggest you
answer variations of the three questions discussedin

question &1.
- How does your wife most often express love to
others?
+ What does she complain about most often?

+ What does she request most often?

Though your wife's complaints may sometimes

irritate you, they're actually giving you valuable

information. If your wife says, “We don't ever
spend any time together” you may be tempted to
say, “What do you mean? We went out to dinner
Thursday night” Such a defensive statement will
end the conversation. If, on the other hand, you
respond, “What would you like for us to do?” you'll
likely get a helpful answer. Your wife's complaints
are the most powerful indicators of her primary love
language.

Another approach is to do a five-week experiment.
The first week, you focus on one of the five love
languages and try to speak it every day. Observe
your wife's response. On Saturday and Sunday, you
relax. The second week—Monday through Friday
—you focus on another of the love languages.
Continue with a different language each of the five
weeks. On the week you speak your wife's primary
love language, you'll likely see a difference in her
countenance and the way she responds to you. It will

be obvious that this is her primary love language.

3. Does your primary love language change as you

getolder?

Ithink our primary love language tends to stay with
us for a lifetime. It's like many other personality
traits that develop early and remain consistent.
For example, a highly organized person was likely
organized as a child. A person who is laid-back and
relaxed likely had those traits as a child. This is true
of numerous personality traits.

However, there are certain situations in life that
make the other love languages extremely attractive.
For example, your primary love language may be
Words of Affirmation, but if youre working two
jobs, then Acts of Service by your wife may become
extremely attractive to you. If she gives you only
Words of Affirmation and doesn't offer to help you
with household responsibilities, you may begin to
think, “'m tired of hearing you say Ilove you' when
you never lift a hand to help me” For the time
you're working two jobs, it may seem as though Acts
of Service has become your primary love language.

However, if your wife's Words of Affirmation

stopped, you'd quickly realize that it was still your
primary love language.

If you experience the death of a parent or a
close friend, an extended hug by your wife may be
the most meaningful thing for you at the moment
—even if Physical Touch isn't your primary love
language. There's something about being held in the
midst of our grief that communicates that we're
loved. So while Physical Touch isn't your primary
love language, it can be very meaningful on certain

occasions.

4. Does the five love language concept work with
children?

Most definitely. Inside every child there's an
emotional love tank. If children feel loved by their
parents, they will grow up normally. But if their
love tanks are empty, they will grow up with
many internal struggles. During the teenage years
they'll likely go looking for love, often in the wrong
places. For that reason, it's extremely important

that parents learn how to love children effectively.

Some time ago, I teamed up with psychiatrist Ross
Campbell to write The 5 Love Languages of Children.
The book is written for parents and is designed
to help them discover their child's primary love
language. It also discusses how that love language
interfaces with the child's anger, the child's learning,
and the child's discipline.

One of the points we make in the book is that
children need to learn how to receive and give love
in all five languages. This produces an emotionally
healthy adult. Thus, parents are encouraged to give
heavy doses of the child's primary love language,
then sprinkle in the other four regularly. When
children receive love in all five languages, they
will eventually learn how to give love in all five

languages.

5. Do children's love languages change when they get
to be teenagers?

A parent said, “I've read The 5 Love Languages of
Children, and it really helped us in raising our children.

However, now our son has become a teenager. We're

doing the same things we've always done, but it doesn't
seem to be working. I'm wondering if his love language

has changed”

1 don't believe a child's love language changes at
age thirteen. However, you must learn new ways to
speak the child's primary love language. Whatever
you've been doing in the past, the teenager considers
it childish and wants nothing to do with it.

If the teen's love language is Physical Touch and
you've been hugging him and kissing him on the
cheek, he may well push you away and say, “Leave me
alone.” It doesn't mean that he doesn't need Physical
Touch; it means that he considers those particular
touches to be childish. You must now speak Physical
Touch in more adult dialects, such as an elbow to
the side, a fist to the shoulder, or a pat on the back.
Or you might wrestle your teen to the floor. These
touches will communicate your love to a teenager.
The worst thing you can do to a teenager whose love
language is Physical Touch is to withdraw when the
teen says, “Don't touch me.”

For more on relating to teens, see The 5 Love

Languages of Teenagers.

6. What if the primary love language of your wife is
difficult for you?

“I didn't grow up in a touching family, and now I've
discovered that my wife's love language is Physical
Touch. It's really difficult for me to initiate it.”

The good news is that all five love languages can be
learned. It's true that most of us grew up speaking
only one or two of these love languages. These will
come natural for us and will be relatively easy to
speak. The others must be learned. As in all learning
situations, small steps make for big gains.

If Physical Touch is your wife's language and you're
not by nature a “toucher” begin with small things
such as putting your hand on her shoulder as you
pour a cup of coffee or give her a “love pat” on
the shoulder as you walk by. These small touches
will begin to break down the barrier. Each time you
touch, the next touch will be easier. You can become
proficient in speaking the language of Physical
Touch.

The same is true with the other languages. If you're
not a Words of Affirmation person and you discover
that your wife's language is Words of Affirmation,
make a list of statements that you hear from other
people or that you read or hear in the media.
Stand in front of a mirror and read the list until
you become comfortable hearing yourself say those
words. Then choose one of the statements to say to
your wife. Each time you affirm her, it will become
easier. Not only will your wife feel good about your
changed behavior but you'll also feel good about
yourself, because you'll know that you're effectively

expressing love to her.

7. Are some of the love languages found more among
women and others found more among men?
Ive never done the research to discover if
certain love languages are gender-slanted. Anecdotal
evidence suggests that more men have Physical
Touch and Words of Affirmation as their love
language and more women have Quality Time and

Receiving Gifts. But I don't know if that's statistically

accurate.

I prefer to deal with the love languages as being
gender-neutral. 1 do know that any one of the five
love languages can be the primary love language of
a man or the primary love language of a woman.
The important thing in marriage is that you discover
the primary and secondary love languages of your
spouse and speak them regularly. If you do that, you
will create a healthy emotional climate for marital

growth.

8. How did you discover the five love languages?

For years, I helped couples in the counseling office
discover what their spouse desired in order to feel
loved. Over time, I began to see a pattern in their
responses. I discovered that what makes one person
feel loved does not necessarily make another person
feel loved. I read over the notes I'd made and asked
myself this question: “When someone sat in my
office and said, 1 feel like my spouse doesn't love

me, what did that person want?” The answers fell

into five categories. I later called them the five love
languages.

I started sharing these languages in workshops
and study groups. When I did, I saw the lights
come on for couples who suddenly realized why they
had been missing each other emotionally. When
they discovered and spoke each other's primary love
language, it radically changed the emotional climate
of their marriage.

Idecidedto write a book in which I would share the
concept, hoping to influence other couples whom I
would never have an opportunity to meet in person.
Now that the book has sold over nine million
copies in English and has been translated into fifty
languages around the world, my efforts have been

more than rewarded.

9. Do the love languages work in other cultures?
Since my academic background is anthropology, this
was my question when a Spanish publisher first
requested permission to translate and publish the

book in Spanish. I initially said, “ don't know if this

concept works in Spanish. I discovered it in an Anglo
setting”

The publisher said, “We've read the book, and it
works in Spanish.” Then came the French edition,
the German, the Dutch, and many more. In almost
every culture, the book has become a bestseller of
the publisher. This leads me to believe that these five
fundamental ways of expressing love are universal.

However, the dialects in which these languages
are spoken will differ from culture to culture. For
example, the kinds of touches that are appropriate
in one culture may not be appropriate in another.
The Acts of Service that are spoken in one culture
may not be spoken in another. But when these
cultural adaptations are made, the concept of the five
love languages will have a profound impact on the

couples in that culture.

10. Why do you think The 5 Love Languages has been
so successful?
Ibelieve that our deepest emotional need is the need

to feel loved. If we're married, the person we would

most like to love us is our spouse. If we feel loved
by our spouse, the whole world is bright and life is
wonderful. On the other hand, if we feel rejected or
ignored, the world begins to look dark.

Most couples get married when they still have
the euphoric feelings of being “in love” When
the euphoric feelings evaporate sometime after
the wedding and the couple's differences begin to
emerge, they often find themselves in conflict. With
no positive plan for resolving conflicts, they resortto
speaking harshly to each other. Harsh words create
feelings of hurt, disappointment, and anger. Not
only do the husband and wife feel unloved but they
also begin to resent each other.

When couples read The 5 Love Languages, they
discover why they lost the romantic feelings of
courtship and how emotional love can be rekindled
in their relationship. Once they begin speaking each
other's primary love language, they are surprised to
see how quickly their emotions turn positive. With
a full love tank, they can process their conflicts in a

much more positive manner and find solutions that

are workable.

The rebirth of emotional love creates a positive
emotional climate between them, and they learn to
work together as a team—encouraging, supporting,
and helping each other reach meaningful goals.

Once this happens, they want to share the message
of the five love languages with all their friends. I
believe the success of The 5 Love Languages can be
attributed to the couples who have read it, learned to
speak each other's language, and recommended it to

their friends.

11. What ifI speak my wife's love language and she
doesn't respond?

“My wife wouldn't read the book, so I decided to
speak her love language and see what would happen.
Nothing happened. She didn't even acknowledge that
I was doing anything differently. How long am 1
supposed to continue speaking her love language when

there's no response?”

I know that it can become discouraging when

you feel that you're investing in your marriage

and receiving nothing in return. There are two
possibilities as to why your wife is not responding.
First, and most likely, you're speaking the wrong love
language.

Many husbands assume that their wife's love
language is Acts of Service. So they start tackling
projects around the house. They check off items on
the household to-do list at a furious pace. They are
sincerely trying to speak their wife's love language.
When she doesn't even acknowledge the efforts, her
husband may become discouraged.

In reality, her primary love language may be Words
of Affirmation. Because her husband feels no love
coming from her, he may be verbally critical of her.
His critical words are like daggers to her heart, so she
withdraws from him. She suffers in silence while he
becomes frustrated that his efforts for improving the
marriage are unsuccessful. The problem is not his
sincerity; the problem is that he's actually speaking
the wrong love language.

On the other hand, assuming you are speaking

your wife's primary love language, there is another

reason why she may not be responding positively.
If she is already involved in another romantic
relationship, either emotionally or sexually, she will
often reason that your efforts have cometoo late. She
may even perceive that your efforts are temporary
and insincere and that you're simply trying to
manipulate her to stay in the marriage. Even if
your wife isn't involved with someone else, if your
relationship has been hostile for a long time, she may
still perceive your efforts as being manipulative.

In this situation, the temptation is to give up,
to stop speaking her love language because it's not
making any difference. The worst thing you can do
is to yield to this temptation. If you give up, it
will confirm her conclusion that your efforts were
designed to manipulate her.

The best approach you can take is to continue to
speak her love language on a regular basis no matter
how she treats you. Set yourself a goal of six months,
nine months, or a year. Your attitude should be, No
matter what her response is, I'm going to love her in

her love language over the long haul. If she walks away

from me, she will walk away from someone who is
loving her unconditionally. This attitude will keep you
on positive path even when you feel discouraged.

There is nothing more powerful that you can
do than to love your wife even when she's
not responding positively. Whatever the ultimate
response of your wife, you will have the satisfaction
of knowing that youve done everything you
could do to restore your marriage. If your wife
eventually chooses to reciprocate your love, you
will have demonstrated for yourself the power of
unconditional love. And you will reap the benefits of
the rebirth of mutual love.

12. Can love be reborn after sexual infidelity?

Nothing devastates marital intimacy more than
sexual unfaithfulness. Sexual intercourse is a
bonding experience. It unites two people in
the deepest possible manner. Almost all cultures
have a public wedding ceremony and a
private consummation of the marriage in sexual

intercourse. Sex is designed to be the unique

expression of our commitment to each other for
a lifetime. When this commitment is broken, it is
devastating to the marriage.

However, this does not mean that the marriage is
destined for divorce. If the offending party is willing
to break off the extramarital involvement and do the
hard work of rebuilding the marriage, there can be
genuine restoration.

In my own counseling experience, I've seen scores
of couples who have experienced healing after
sexual infidelity. It involves not only breaking off the
extramarital affair but also discovering what led to
the affair in the first place.

Success in restoration is a two-pronged approach.
First, the offending party must be willing to explore
their own personality, beliefs, and lifestyle that led
them to the affair. There must be a willingness
to change attitudes and behavior patterns. Second,
the couple must be willing to take an honest look
at the dynamics of their marriage and be open to
replacing destructive patterns with positive patterns

of integrity and sincerity. Both of these solutions

will normally require the help of a professional
counselor.

Research indicates that the couples who are
most likely to survive sexual infidelity are those
couples who receive both individual counseling
and marriage counseling. Understanding the five
love languages and choosing to speak each other's
language can help create an emotional climate in
which the hard work of restoring the marriage can

be successful.

13. What do you do when your wife refuses to speak
your love language even though she knows it?

“We both read The 5 Love Languages, took the profile,
and discussed our primary love languages with each
other. That was two months ago. My wife knows that
my love language is Words of Affirmation. Yet in two
months, I have yet to hear her say anything positive.
Her love language is Acts of Service. I've started doing
several things she's asked me to do around the house.
Ithink she appreciates what I'm doing, but she never

tells me.”

Let me begin by saying that we cannot make our
spouse speak our love language. Love is a choice. We
can request love, but we cannot demand it. Having
said that, let me suggest some reasons why your wife
may not be speaking your love language.

She may have grown up in a home where
she received few positive words. Her parents were
perhaps very critical of her. Thus, she did not have a
positive role model when it comes to speaking Words
of Affirmation. Such words may be very difficult for
her to verbalize. It will require effort on her part
and patience on your part as she learns to speak a
language that's foreign to her.

A second reason that she may not be speaking
your love language is that she fears that if she
gives you Words of Affirmation for the few changes
you've made, you'll become complacent and not go
on to make the major changes she's hoping for. It is
the mistaken idea that if I reward mediocrity, 1 will
curtail the person's aspirations to be better. That is a
commonly held myth that keeps some parents from

verbally affirming children. Of course, it's untrue.

If a person's primary love language is Words of
Affirmation, those words challenge the person to
greater levels of accomplishment.

My suggestion is that you initiate the love tank
game discussed in chapter 9. You ask her, “On a scale
of zero to ten, how full is your love tank?” If she
answers anything less than 10, you ask, “What could
I do to help fill it?” Whatever she says, do it to the
best of your ability. If you do this once a week for a
month, chances are she will start asking you how full
your love tank is. And you can begin making requests
ofher. This is a fun way of teaching her how to speak

your love language.

14. Can emotional love return after it's been gone for
thirty years?
“We're not enemies. We don't fight. We simply live in
the same house like roommates.”
Allow me to answer this question with a true story.
A couple came to me at one of my seminars. The
husband said, “We've come to thank you for bringing

new life to our marriage. We've been married for

thirty years, but the last twenty years have been
extremely empty. If you want to know how bad
our marriage has been, we haven't taken a vacation
together in twenty years. We simply live in the same
house, try to be civil, and that's about it.

“A year ago, I shared my struggle with a friend. He
went into his house, came back with your book The 5
Love Languages and said to me, 'Read this. It will help
you.' The last thing I wanted to do was read another
book, but I did. I went home that night and read
the whole book. I finished about 3:00 a.m., and with
every chapter, I realized that we had failed to speak
each other's love language through the years.

“I gave the book to my wife and asked if she would
read it and tell me what she thought ofit. Two weeks
later, she said, 1 read the book. “What did you think
about it? I asked. “ think if we had read that book
thirty years ago, our marriage would have been very
different. I said to her, “That's the same thought I
had. Do you think it would make any difference if we
tried now?” She responded, “We don't have anything
tolose.

“We discussed our primary love languages and
agreed that we would try to speak each other's
language at least once a week to see what would
happen. If anyone had told me that in two months I
would have love feelings for her again, I would never
have believed it. But I did.”

His wife spoke up and said, “If anyone had told me
that I would ever have love feelings for him again, I
would have said, 'No way. Too much has happened.”
She then said, “This year we took our first vacation
together in twenty years and had a wonderful time.
We drove four hundred miles to come to your
seminar and enjoyed being with each other. I'm just
sad that we wasted so many years of simply living
in the same house when we could have had a love
relationship. Thank you for your book”

“Thank you for sharing your story, I said. “ find
it greatly encouraging. I hope you make the next
twenty years so exciting that the last twenty will be a
dim memory”

“That's what we intend to do,” they both said
together.

Can emotional love be reborn in a marriage after
thirty years? Yes, if the two of you are willing to try

speaking each other's love language.

15. I'm single. How does the love language concept

apply to me?

Through the years, many single adults have said
to me, “I know you wrote your original book for
married couples. However, I read it and it helped
me in all my relationships. Why don't you write a
book on the five love languages for singles?” And so
Idid. It's entitled The 5 Love Languages for Singles. In
the book, I try to help single adults apply the love
language concept in all their relationships. I begin by
helping them understand why they felt love or did
not feel love growing up as a child.

One young man who is incarcerated said, “Thanks
for sharing the five love languages. For the first time
in my life, I finally understand that my mother loves
me. I realize that my love language is Physical Touch,
but my mother never hugged me. In fact, the first

hug I ever remember getting from my mother was

the day I left for prison. But I realize that she spoke
Acts of Service very strongly. She worked hard to
keep us in food and clothes and to provide a place
to live. 1 know now that she loved me; she simply
wasn't speaking my language. But now I understand
she really did love me.”

Ialso help singles apply the love language concept
in their sibling relationships, work relationships,
and dating relationships. I have been extremely
encouraged by the response of single adults. I hope
that if you're single, you'll discover what others have
discovered. Expressing love in a person's primary

love language enhances all relationships.

16. How do I speak my spouse's love language if he/
she is away from me for a time (e.g., deployment,
work, school)?

I am frequently asked how to apply the love

languages in long-distance relationships. Physical

touch and quality time are particularly challenging

in these instances. The simple answer is this:

you must be creative and committed to staying

connected despite the distance.

If your love language is physical touch, then here
are a few creative ideas for speaking one another's
love language. First, having photographs of yourself
as a couple may remind you of enjoyable times
together. Having physical items that belong to
one another may also remind you of each other.
Perhaps a shirt or the cologne or perfume of your
significant other may remind you of that person
and of enjoyable times together. You also should
email, text, write, etc., about how you enjoy being
with one another. You might even try keeping a
calendar on which you physically mark off the days
until you're able to be together again. This is not
a comprehensive list of ideas, but all of these are
physical activities and items that will at least in part
help satisfy your physical love language.

As for quality time, the time you spend staying in
contact, working to encourage one another, sending
each other notes and gifts, etc., is quality time. Of

course, it's not the preferred form of quality time, but

it is quality time nonetheless. You must learn to view
it and appreciate it as such.

More specific ways you can express the language of
quality time are to talk often about how you desireto
stay close and keep your love alive. Read or reread The
5 Love Languages (or The 5 Love Languages Military
Edition) together while you're apart, or listen to
my podcasts, and discuss these together as a way
of nurturing your relationship. This, too, requires
commitment, but if you truly love one another, then
you'll find the energy and time to stay connected.

Use your situation as an opportunity to practice

the other languages as well. Notes and gifts need to

be viewed as more than “just” notes and gifts. They
need to be viewed as physical effort and words of
affirmation meant to express love.

In closing, yes, distance is difficult in a
relationship, but it does not have to be the end of
the relationship. Obviously, the more time you can
spend together, the better. And you should strive for
this. However, if you are a committed couple and are
willing to be creative in how you speak one another's
love language, then your relationship can survive

and even thrive during your time apart.

The 5 Love Languages*
Profile for Couples
—for Him

The 5 Love Languages Profile will give you and your
spouse or significant other a thorough analysis of your
emotional communication preference. It will single
out your primary love language, what it means, and
how you can use it to connect with your loved one with

intimacy and fulfillment. Two profiles are included so

that each of you can complete the assessment.

You will now see 30 paired statements. Please
select the statement that best defines what is most
meaningful to you in your relationship as a couple.
Both statements may or may not sound like they fit
your situation, but please choose the statement that
captures the essence of what is most meaningful to
you the majority of the time. Allow 10 to 15 minutes
to complete the profile. Take it when you are relaxed,
and try not to rush through it. Then tally your results
and read how to interpret your profile on page 202. An
interactive version of this personal profile is available

at www.5LoveLanguages.com/profile.

It's more meaningful to me when ...

1 Ireceive a loving note/text/emailfornospecial A

reason from my loved one.

she and Ihug. E

Ican spend alone time with her—just the two

ofus.

she does something practical to help me

out.

she gives me a little gift as a token of our love

for each other.

Igetto spend uninterrupted leisure time

with her.

she unexpectedly does something for me like

filling my car or doing the laundry.
she and Itouch.

she puts her arm around me when we're in

public.
she surprises me with a gift.

I'm around her, even if we're not really doing

anything.
we hold hands.

my loved one gives me a gift.

10

11

12

13

Ihear “Ilove you” from her.
Isitcloseto her.

Iam complimented by her for no apparent

reason.
Iget the chance to just “hang out” with her.
Iunexpectedly get small gifts from her.
I hear her tell me, “Tm proud of you”
she helps me with a task.
Igetto do things with her.
Ihear supportive words from her.

she does things for me instead of just talking

about doing nice things.
1feel connected to her through a hug.
I hear praise from her.

she gives me something that shows she

was really thinking about me.

14

15

16

17

18

19

I'm able to just be around her.
Igeta back rub or massage from her.

she reacts positively to something I've

accomplished.

she does something for me that I know she

doesn't particularly enjoy.
she and I kiss frequently.

Isense she is showing interest in the

things I care about.

my loved one works on special projects with me

that I have to complete.
she gives me an exciting gift.
she compliments me on my appearance.

she takes the time to listen to me and really

understand my feelings.
we share nonsexual touch in public.

she offers to run errands for me.

20

21

22

23

she does a bit more than her normal share
ofthe responsibilities we share (around the

house, work-related, etc.).

Igeta gift that I know she put thought into

choosing.

she doesn't check her phone while we're

talking.

she goes out of her way to do something

thatrelieves pressure on me.

Ican look forward to a holiday because of a gift

1anticipate receiving.

Ihear the words “I appreciate you” from

her.

she brings me a little gift after she has been

traveling without me.

she takes care of something 'm
responsible to do but I feel too stressed to

doatthetime.

24

25

26

27

28

29

she doesn't interrupt me while Y'm talking.

gift giving is an important part of our

relationship.

she helps me out when she knows !'m already

tired.

Iget to go somewhere while spending time

with her.
she and I are physically intimate.

she gives me a little gift that she picked up

in the course of her normal day.
she says something encouraging to me.

Igetto spend time in a shared activity or

hobby with her.

she surprises me with a small token of her

appreciation.

she and Itouch a lot during the normal

course of the day.

she helps me out--especially if know she's

already busy.

I hear her specifically tell me, “appreciate

you”

30 — sheandtembrace after wevebeen apart fora

while.

Ihear her say how much I mean to her.

The 5 Love Languages?

Profile for Couples—for Her

Here is the second profile. As previously mentioned,
it will give you a thorough analysis of your emotional
communication preference. It will single out your
primary love language, what it means, and how you
can use it to connect with your loved one with
intimacy and fulfillment. Two profiles are included so
that each of you can complete the assessment.

You will now see 30 paired statements. Please
select the statement that best defines what is most
meaningful to you in your relationship as a couple.
Both statements may or may not sound like they fit
your situation, but please choose the statement that
captures the essence of what is most meaningful to
you the majority of the time. Allow 10 to 15 minutes
to complete the profile. Take it when you are relaxed,
and try not to rush through it. Then tally your results
and read how to interpret your profile on page 202. An
interactive version of this personal profile is available

at www.5LoveLanguages.com/profile.

It's more meaningful to me when ...

1 Ireceive a loving note/text/emailfornospecial A

reason from my loved one.

he and hug. E
2 Ican spend alone time with him—just the two B
ofus.

he does something practical to help me

out.

he gives me a little gift as a token of our love for

each other.

Igetto spend uninterrupted leisure time

with him.

he unexpectedly does something for me like

filling my car or doing the laundry.
he and Itouch.

he puts his arm around me when we're in

public.
he surprises me with a gift.

I'm around him, even if we're not really doing

anything.
we hold hands.
my loved one gives me a gift.

Ihear “love you” from him.

10

11

12

13

14

Isit close to him.

Iam complimented by him for no apparent

reason.
Iget the chance to just “hang out” with him.
Iunexpectedly get small gifts from him.
I hear him tell me, “T'm proud of you”
he helps me with a task.
Igetto do things with him.
Ihear supportive words from him.

he does things for me instead of just talking

about doing nice things.
Ifeel connected to him through a hug.
I hear praise from him.

he gives me something that shows he was

really thinking about me.
T'm able to just be around him.

Iget a back rub or massage from him.

15

16

17

18

19

20

he reacts positively to something I've

accomplished.

he does something for me that [know he

doesn't particularly enjoy.
heand Ikiss frequently.

Isense he is showing interest in the things

Icare about.

my loved one works on special projects with me

that I have to complete.
he gives me an exciting gift.
he compliments me on my appearance.

hetakes the time to listen to me and really

understand my feelings.
we share nonsexual touch in public.
he offers to run errands for me.

he does a bit more than his normal share of the
responsibilities we share (around the house,

work-related, etc.).

21

22

23

24

25

Igeta gift that Iknow he put thought into

choosing.
he doesn't check his phone while we're talking.

he goes out of his way to do something

thatrelieves pressure on me.

Ican look forward to a holiday because of a gift

1anticipate receiving.

Ihear the words “I appreciate you” from

him.

he brings me a little gift after he has been.

traveling without me.

he takes care of something I'm responsible
to do but I feel too stressed to do at the

time.
he doesn't interrupt me while 'm talking.

gift giving is an important part of our

relationship.

he helps me out when he knows I'm already

26

27

28

29

30

tired.

Igetto go somewhere while spending time

with him.
he and I are physically intimate.

he gives me a little gift that he picked upin

the course of his normal day.
he says something encouraging to me.

Igetto spend time in a shared activity or

hobby with him.

he surprises me with a small token of his

appreciation.

he and Itouch a lot during the normal

course of the day.

he helps me out—especially fl know he's

already busy.

Ihear him specifically tell me, “T appreciate

you”

he and I embrace after we've been apart for a

while.

Thear him say how much I mean to him. A

Look back through the letters you selected and record

the number of responses in the spaces below.

A: B. c:
D:

E:

A = Words of Affirmation; B = Quality Time; C =
Receiving Gifts; D = Acts of Service; E = Physical Touch

INTERPRETING YOUR PROFILE SCORE

The highest score indicates your primary love
language (the highest score is 12). It's not uncommon
to have two high scores, although one language does
have a slight edge for most people. That just means two
languages are important to you.

The lower scores indicate those languages you
seldom use to communicate love and that probably

don't affect you very much on an emotional level.

IMPORTANT TO REMEMBER

You may have scored more highly on certain love
languages than others, but do not dismiss those other
languages as insignificant. Your loved one may express
love in those ways, and it will be helpful to you to
understand this about him.

In the same way, it will benefit your spouse or
significant other to know your primary love language
in order to best express affection for you in ways that
you interpret as love. Every time you or he speaks each

other's language, you score emotional points with each

other. Of course, this isn't a game with a scorecard!
The payoff of speaking each other's love language is
a greater sense of connection. This translates into
better communication, increased understanding, and,
ultimately, improved romance.

If your spouse or significant other has not
already done so, encourage him or her to
take The 5 Love Languages Profile in this book,
online 5lovelanguages.com/profile, or on The 5 Love
Languages app (iOS or Android). Discuss your
respective love languages, and use this insight to

improve your relationship!

Notes

1. Proverbs 18:21.

2. Kelly Flanagan, “Why One Text Message Is More
Romantic Than a Hundred Valentine Cards”
Untangled, February 12, 2014, drkellyflanagan.com.

3. Luke 6:27-28; 31-32.

4. Luke 6:38.

[f) /Slovelanguages
STRENGTHEN YOUR RELATIONSHIPS

ONLINE

“ /drgarychapman

[V) /drgarychapman

& fuser/drgarychapman

SL

DISCOVER YOUR LOVE LANGUAGE AND MORE AT

wunul. Slovelanquages. com

OTHER WAYS TO CONNECT:

PREMARITAL RESOURCE

w

Prologue

The Story of Your Marriage Starts Here.

EASY: A simple online resource that will teach you
the tools you need to help your marriage last.

ENGAGING: Fun and challenging conversation
topics from premarital counselor, teacher, and
author Jeff Helton and 41 New York Times
bestselling author Dr. Gary Chapman.

DYNAMIC: Intuitive interface that is easy to use on your

computer, tablet, or mobile device. Take it anywhere!

SIGN UP FOR FREE AT
STARTMARRIAGEHERE COM

Available wherever books are sold.

OTHER BOOKS

WE THINK YOU'LL LOVE

GARY CHAPMAN us

"LOVE Bat ver mona
Languages ne
fa more vihen
ú try
Isn't
, l Enough
AURNNDO Gary Cutoman Damas
GARY us
CHAPMAN
K x growing up
social

HANDLING.
SOTO
À EmonioN

CL ecra war

IS ING 450]
TOXIE

NO RKELAce

gti JR
os

Clnty

